<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title></title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="" epub:type="se:short-story">
<h2>A Country Excursion</h2>
<p>For five months they had been talking of going to lunch at some country restaurant in the neighbourhood of Paris, on Madame Dufour&#39;s birthday, and as they were looking forward very impatiently to the outing, they had risen very early that morning. Monsieur Dufour had borrowed the milkman&#39;s cart, and drove himself. It was a very neat, two-wheeled conveyance. It had a roof supported by four iron posts to which were attached curtains, which had been raised so that they could see the countryside. The curtain at the back, alone, fluttered in the breeze like a flag. Madame Dufour, resplendent in a wonderful, cherrycoloured silk dress, sat by the side of her husband. The old grandmother and the daughter were accommodated with two chairs, and a yellow-haired youth, of whom, however, nothing was to be seen except his head, lay at the bottom of the trap.</p>
<p>After they had followed the Avenue des ChampsElys&#233;es, and passed the fortifications by the Porte Maillot, they began to enjoy the scenery.</p>
<p>When they got to the bridge of Neuilly, Monsieur Dufour said: &quot;Here we are in the country at last!&quot; At that warning, his wife grew sentimental about the beauties of nature. When they got to the crossroads at Courbevoie, they were seized with admiration for the tremendous view. Down there on the right was the spire of Argenteuil church, above it rose the hills of Sannois and the mill of Orgemont, while on the left, the aqueduct of Marly stood out against the clear morning sky. In the distance they could see the terrace of Saint-Germain, and opposite to them, at the end of a low chain of hills, the new fort of Cormeilles. Far in the background, a very long way off, beyond the plains and villages, one could see the sombre green of the forests.</p>
<p>The sun was beginning to burn their faces, the dust got into their eyes, and on either side of the road there stretched an interminable tract of bare, ugly country, which smelled unpleasant. You would have thought that it had been ravaged by a pestilence which had even attacked the buildings, for skeletons of dilapidated and deserted houses, or small cottages left in an unfinished state, as if the contractors had not been paid, reared their four roofless walls on each side.</p>
<p>Here and there tall factory-chimneys rose up from the barren soil, the only vegetation on that putrid land, where the spring breezes wafted an odour of petroleum and slate, mingled with another smell that was even still less agreeable. At last, however, they crossed the Seine a second time. It was delightful on the bridge; the river sparkled in the sun, and they had a feeling of quiet satisfaction and enjoyment in drinking in purer air, not impregnated by the black smoke of factories, nor by the miasma from the dumping-grounds. A man whom they met told them that the name of the place was Bezons; so Monsieur Dufour pulled up, and read the attractive announcement outside an eating-house:</p>
<p>&quot;Restaurant Poulin, fish soups and fried fish, private rooms, arbours, and swings.&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;Well! Madame Dufour, will this suit you? Will you make up your mind at last?&quot;</p>
<p>She read the announcement in her turn, and then looked at the house for a time.</p>
<p>It was a white country inn, built by the roadside, and through the open door she could see the bright zinc of the counter, at which two workmen in their Sunday best were sitting. At last she made up her mind, and said:</p>
<p>&quot;Yes, this will do; and, besides, there is a view.&quot; So they drove into a large stretch of ground planted with trees, behind the inn, which was only separated from the river by the towing-path, and got out. The husband sprang out first, and held out his arms for his wife. As the step was very high, Madame Dufour, in order to reach him, had to show the lower part of her limbs, whose former slenderness had disappeared in fat. Monsieur Dufour, who was already getting excited by the country air, pinched her calf, and then, taking her in his arms, set her on the ground, as if she had been some enormous bundle. She shook the dust out of the silk dress, and then looked round, to see in what sort of a place she was.</p>
<p>She was a stout woman, of about thirty-six, like a full-blown rose, and delightful to look at. She could hardly breathe, as she was laced too tightly, which forced the heaving mass of her superabundant bosom up to her double chin. Next, the girl put her hand on to her father&#39;s shoulder, and jumped lightly down. The youth with the yellow hair had got down by stepping on the wheel, and he helped Monsieur Dufour to get the grandmother out. Then they unharnessed the horse, which they tied up to a tree, and the carriage fell back, with both shafts in the air. The man and boy took off their coats, washed their hands in a pail of water, and then joined the ladies, who had already taken possession of the swings.</p>
<p>Mademoiselle Dufour was trying to swing herself standing up, but she could not succeed in getting a start. She was a pretty girl of about eighteen; one of those women who suddenly excite your desire when you meet them in the street, and who leave you with a vague feeling of uneasiness and of excited senses. She was tall, had a small waist and large hips, with a dark skin, very large eyes, and very black hair. Her dress clearly marked the outlines of her firm, full figure, which was accentuated by the motion of her hips as she tried to swing herself higher. Her arms were stretched over her head to hold the rope, so that her bosom rose at every movement she made. Her hat, which a gust of wind had blown off, was hanging behind her, and as the swing gradually rose higher and higher, she showed her delicate limbs up to the knees at each time, and the wind from the perfumed petticoats, more heady than the fumes of wine, blew into the faces of her father and friend, who were looking at her, smiling.</p>
<p>Sitting in the other swing, Madame Dufour kept saying in a monotonous voice:</p>
<p>&quot;Cyprian, come and swing me; do come and swing me, Cyprian!&#8221;</p>
<p>At last he complied, and turning up his shirtsleeves, as if he intended to work very hard, with much difficulty he set his wife in motion. She clutched the two ropes, and held her legs out straight, so as not to touch the ground. She enjoyed feeling giddy from the motion of the swing, and her whole figure shook like a jelly on a dish, but as she went higher and higher, she grew too giddy and got frightened. Every time she was coming back, she uttered a shriek, which made all the little urchins come round, and down below, beneath the garden hedge, she vaguely saw a row of mischievous heads, making faces as they laughed.</p>
<p>When a servant girl came out, they ordered lunch.</p>
<p>&quot;Some fried fish, a stewed rabbit, salad, and dessert,&quot; Madame Dufour said, with an important air. &quot;Bring two quarts of wine, and a bottle of claret,&#39; her husband said.</p>
<p>&quot;We will have lunch on the grass,&quot; the girl added. The grandmother, who had an affection for cats, had been petting one that belonged to the house, and had been bestowing the most affectionate words on it, for the last ten minutes. The animal, no doubt secretly pleased by her attentions, kept close to the good woman, but just out of reach of her hand, and quietly walked round the trees, against which she rubbed herself, with her tail up, purring with pleasure.</p>
<p>&quot;Hello!&quot; exclaimed the youth with the yellow hair, who was ferreting about, &quot;here are two swell boats!&quot; They all went to look at them, and saw two beautiful skiffs in a wooden boathouse, which were as beautifully finished as if they had been objects of luxury. They were moored side by side, like two tall, slender girls, in their narrow shining length, and aroused in one a wish to drift in them on warm summer mornings and evenings, along flower-covered banks of the river, where the trees dip their branches into the water, where the rushes are continually rustling in the breeze, and where the swift kingfishers dart about like flashes of blue lightning.</p>
<p>The whole family looked at them with great respect.</p>
<p>&quot;They are indeed two swell boats,&quot; Monsieur Dufour repeated gravely, and he examined them closely, commenting on them like a connoisseur. He had been in the habit of rowing in his younger days, he said, and when he had that in his handsand he went through the action of pulling the oars—he did not care a fig for anybody. He had beaten more than one Englishman formerly at the Joinville regattas, and he made jokes on the word &quot;dames,&quot; used to describe the two things for holding the oars. He grew quite excited at last, and offered to make a bet that in a boat like that he could row six miles an hour, without exerting himself.</p>
<p>&quot;Lunch is ready,&quot; said the servant, appearing at the entrance to the boathouse. They all hurried off, but two young men were already lunching at the best place, which Madame Dufour had chosen in her mind as her seat. No doubt they were the owners of the skiffs, for they were dressed in boat ing costume. They were stretched out, almost lying on chairs, and were sunburned, and had on flannel trousers and thin cotton jerseys, with short sleeves, which showed their bare arms, which were as strong as blacksmiths&#39;. They were two strong young fellows, who thought a great deal of their vigour, and who showed in all their movements that elasticity and grace of limb which can only be acquired by exercise, and which is so different from the awkwardness with which the same continual work stamps the mechanic.</p>
<p>They exchanged a rapid smile when they saw the mother, and then a look on seeing the daughter. &quot;Let us give up our place,&quot; one of them said; &quot;it will make us acquainted with them.&quot;</p>
<p>The other got up immediately, and holding his black and red boating-cap in his hand, he politely offered the ladies the only shady place in the garden. With many excuses they accepted, and so that it might be more rural, they sat on the grass, without either tables or chairs.</p>
<p>The two young men took their plates, knives, forks, etc., to a table a little way off, and began to eat again. Their bare arms, which they showed continually, rather embarrassed the young girl, who even pretended to turn her head aside, and not to see them. But Madame Dufour, who was rather bolder, tempted by feminine curiosity, looked at them every moment, and no doubt compared them with the secret unsightliness of her husband. She had squatted herself on the ground with her legs tucked under her, after the manner of tailors, and kept wriggling about continually, under the pretext that ants were crawling about her somewhere. Monsieur Dufour, whom the presence and politeness of the strangers had put into rather a bad temper, was trying to find a comfortable position, which he did not, however, succeed in doing, while the youth with the yellow hair was eating as silently as an ogre.</p>
<p>&quot;It is lovely weather, Monsieur,&quot; the stout lady said to one of the boating-men. She wished to be friendly, because they had given up their place. &quot;It is, indeed, Madame,&quot; he replied; &quot;do you often go into the country?&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;Oh! Only once or twice a year, to get a little fresh air; and you, Monsieur?&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;I come and sleep here every night.&#39; &quot;Oh! That must be very nice?&quot; &quot;Certainly it is, Madame.&quot; And he gave them such a poetical account of his daily life, that in the hearts of these shopkeepers, who were deprived of the meadows, and who longed for country walks, it roused that innate love of nature, which they all felt so strongly the whole year round, behind the counter in their shop.</p>
<p>The girl raised her eyes and looked at the oarsman with emotion, and Monsieur Dufour spoke for the first time.</p>
<p>&quot;It is indeed a happy life,&quot; he said. And then he added: &#8220;A little more rabbit, my dear?&#8221;</p>
<p>&quot;No, thank you,&quot; she replied, and turning to the young men again, and pointing to their arms, asked: &quot;Do you never feel cold like that?&quot;</p>
<p>They both laughed, and amazed the family by telling of the enormous fatigue they could endure, of bathing while in a state of tremendous perspiration, of rowing in the fog at night, and they struck their chests violently, to show how they sounded.</p>
<p>&quot;Ah! You look very strong,&quot; the husband said, and he did not talk any more of the time when he used to beat the English. The girl was looking at them askance now, and the young fellow with the yellow hair, as he had swallowed some wine the wrong way, and was coughing violently, bespattered Madame Dufour&#39;s cherry-coloured silk dress. Madame got angry, and sent for some water to wash the spots.</p>
<p>Meanwhile it had grown unbearably hot, the sparkling river looked like a blaze of fire and the fumes of the wine were getting into their heads. Monsieur Dufour, who had a violent hiccough, had unbuttoned his waistcoat and the top of his trousers, while his wife, who felt choking, was gradually unfastening her dress. The youth was shaking his yellow mop of hair in a happy frame of mind, and kept helping himself to wine, and as the old grandmother felt drunk, she endeavoured to be very stiff and dignified. As for the girl, she showed nothing except a peculiar brightness in her eyes, while the brown skin on her cheeks became more rosy.</p>
<p>The coffee finished them off; they spoke of singing, and each of them sang, or repeated a couplet, which the others repeated enthusiastically. Then they got up with some difficulty, and while the two women, who were rather dizzy, were getting some fresh air, the two males, who were altogether drunk, were performing gymnastic tricks. Heavy, limp, and with scarlet faces, they hung awkwardly on to the iron rings, without being able to raise themselves, while their shirts were continually threatening to part company with their trousers, and to flap in the wind like flags.</p>
<p>Meanwhile, the two boating-men had got their skiffs into the water. They came back, and politely asked the ladies whether they would like a row.</p>
<p>&quot;Would you like one, Monsieur Dufour?&quot; his wife exclaimed. &quot;Please come!&quot;</p>
<p>He merely gave her a drunken look, without understanding what she said. Then one of the rowers came up, with two fishing-rods in his hand; and the hope of catching a gudgeon, that great aim of the Parisian shopkeeper, made Dufour&#39;s dull eyes gleam. He politely allowed them to do whatever they liked, while he sat in the shade, under the bridge, with his feet dangling over the river, by the side of the young man with the yellow hair, who was sleeping soundly close to him.</p>
<p>One of the boating-men made a martyr of himself, and took the mother.</p>
<p>&quot;Let us go to the little wood on the Ile aux Anglais!&quot; he called out, as he rowed off. The other skiff went slower, for the rower was looking at his companion so intently, that he thought of nothing else. His emotion paralysed his strength, while the girl, who was sitting on the steerer&#39;s seat, gave herself up to the enjoyment of being on the water. She felt disinclined to think, felt a lassitude in her limbs, a complete self-relaxation, as if she were intoxicated. She had become very flushed, and breathed pantingly. The effect of the wine, increased by the extreme heat, made all the trees on the bank seem to bow, as she passed. A vague wish for enjoyment, a fermentation of her blood, seemed to pervade her whole body, and she was also a little agitated by this t&#234;te-&#224;—t&#234;te on the water, in a place which seemed depopulated by the heat, with this young man, who thought her beautiful, whose looks seemed to caress her skin, and whose eyes were as penetrating and exciting as the sun&#39;s rays.</p>
<p>Their inability to speak increased their emotion, and they looked about them. At last he made an effort and asked her name.</p>
<p>&quot;Henriette,&quot; she said.</p>
<p>&quot;Why! My name is Henri,&quot; he replied. The sound of their voices calmed them, and they looked at the banks. The other skiff had gone ahead of them, and seemed to be waiting for them. The rower called out:</p>
<p>&quot;We will meet you in the wood; we are going as far as Robinson because Madame Dufour is thirsty.&quot; Then he bent over his oars again and rowed off so quickly that he was soon out of sight.</p>
<p>Meanwhile, a continual roar, which they had heard for some time, came nearer, and the river itself seemed to shiver, as if the dull noise were rising from its depths.</p>
<p>&quot;What is that noise?&quot; she asked. It was the noise of the weir, which cut the river in two, at the island. He was explaining it to her, when above the noise of the waterfall they heard the song of a bird, which seemed a long way off.</p>
<p>&quot;Listen!&quot; he said; &quot;the nightingales are singing during the day, so the females must be sitting.&#39;</p>
<p>A nightingale! She had never heard one before, and the idea of listening to one roused visions of poetic tenderness in her heart. A nightingale! That is to say, the invisible witness of the lover&#39;s interview which Juliet invoked on her balcony; that celestial music which is attuned to human kisses; that eternal inspirer of all those languorous romances which open idealized visions to the poor, tender, little hearts of sensitive girls!</p>
<p>She was going to hear a nightingale.</p>
<p>&quot;We must not make a noise,&quot; her companion said, &quot;and then we can go into the wood, and sit down close to it.&#39;</p>
<p>The skiff seemed to glide. They saw the trees on the island, the banks of which were so low that they could look into the depths of the thickets. They stopped, he made the boat fast, Henriette took hold of Henri&#39;s arm, and they went beneath the trees.</p>
<p>&quot;Stoop,&quot; he said, so she bent down, and they went into an inextricable thicket of creepers, leaves, and reed-grass, which formed an impenetrable retreat, and which the young man laughingly called &quot;his private room.&quot;</p>
<p>Just above their heads, perched in one of the trees which hid them, the bird was still singing. He uttered shakes and trills, and then long, vibrating sounds that filled the air and seemed to lose themselves in the distance, across the level country, through that burning silence which hung low upon the whole country round. They did not speak for fear of frightening the bird away. They were sitting close together, and slowly Henri&#39;s arm stole round the girl&#39;s waist and squeezed it gently. She took that daring hand, but without anger, and kept removing it whenever he put it round her; not, however, feeling at all embarrassed by this caress, just as if it had been something quite natural which she was resisting just as naturally.</p>
<p>She was listening to the bird in ecstasy. She felt an infinite longing for happiness, for some sudden demonstration of tenderness, for a revelation of divine poesy. She felt such a softening at her heart, and such a relaxation of her nerves, that she began to cry, without knowing why. The young man was now straining her close to him, and she did not remove his arm; she did not think of it. Suddenly the nightingale stopped, and a voice called out in the distance: &quot;Henriette!&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;Do not reply,&quot; he said in a low voice, &quot;you will drive the bird away.&#39;</p>
<p>But she had no idea of doing so, and they remained in the same position for some time. Madame Dufour had sat down somewhere or other, for from time to time they heard the stout lady break out into little bursts of laughter.</p>
<p>The girl was still crying; she was filled with delightful feelings, her skin was burning and she felt a strange sensation of tickling. Henri&#39;s head was on her shoulder, and suddenly he kissed her on the lips. She was surprised and angry, and, to avoid him, she threw herself back. But he fell upon her and his whole body covered hers. For a long time he sought her lips, which she refused him, then he pressed her mouth to his. Seized with desire she returned his kiss, holding him to her breast, and she abandoned all resistance, as if crushed by too heavy a weight.</p>
<p>Everything about them was still. The bird began again to sing, sending forth three penetrating notes at first, like a call of love, then, after a momentary silence, it began in weaker tones its slow modulations. A soft breeze crept up, raising a murmur among the leaves, while from the depths of the branches two burning sighs mingled with the song of the nightingale and the gentle breath of the wood.</p>
<p>An intoxication possessed the bird and by degrees its notes came more rapidly like a fire spreading or a passion increasing, and they seemed to be an accompaniment to the kisses which resounded beneath the tree. Then the delirium of his song burst forth. He seemed to swoon on certain notes, to have spasms of melodious emotion. Sometimes he would rest a moment, emitting only two or three slight sounds suddenly terminated on a sharp note. Or he would launch into a frenzy, pouring out his song, with thrills and jerks, like a mad song of love, followed by cries of triumph. Then he stopped, hearing beneath him a sigh so deep that it seemed as though a soul were transported. The sound was prolonged for a while, then it ended in a sob.</p>
<p>They were both very pale when they quitted their grassy retreat. The blue sky looked dull to them, the ardent sun was clouded over to their eyes, they perceived not the solitude and the silence. They walked quickly side by side, without speaking or touching each other, appearing to be irreconcilable enemies, as if disgust had sprung up between their bodies, and hatred between their souls. From time to time Henriette called out: &quot;Mamma!&quot;</p>
<p>They heard a noise in a thicket, and Henri fancied he saw a white dress being quickly pulled down over a fat calf. The stout lady appeared, looking rather confused, and more flushed than ever, her eyes shining and her breast heaving, and perhaps just a little too close to her companion. The latter must have had some strange experience, for his face was wrinkled with smiles that he could not check.</p>
<p>Madame Dufour took his arm tenderly, and they returned to the boats. Henri went on first, still without speaking, by the girl&#39;s side, and he thought he heard a loud kiss being stifled. At last they got back to Bezons.</p>
<p>Monsieur Dufour, who had sobered up, was waiting for them very impatiently, while the youth with the yellow hair was having a mouthful of something to eat before leaving the inn. The carriage was in the yard, with the horse yoked, and the grandmother, who had already got in, was frightened at the thought of being overtaken by night, before they got back to Paris, the outskirts not being safe.</p>
<p>The young men shook hands with them, and the Dufour family drove off.</p>
<p>&quot;Good-bye, until we meet again!&quot; the oarsmen cried, and the answers they got were a sigh and a tear.</p>
<p>Two months later, as Henri was going along the Rue des Martyrs, he saw &quot;Dufour, Ironmonger,&quot; over a door. So he went in, and saw the stout lady sitting at the counter. They recognized each other immediately, and after an interchange of polite greetings, he inquired after them all.</p>
<p>&quot;And how is Mademoiselle Henriette?&quot; he inquired, specially.</p>
<p>&quot;Very well, thank you; she is married.&quot; &quot;Ah!&quot; Mastering his feelings, he added: &quot;To whom was she married?&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;To that young man who went with us, you know; he has joined us in business.&#39; &quot;I remember him perfectly.&quot;</p>
<p>He was going out, feeling unhappy, though scarcely knowing why, when Madame called him back.</p>
<p>&quot;And how is your friend?&quot; she asked, rather shyly.</p>
<p>&quot;He is very well, thank you.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Please give him our compliments, and beg him to come and call when he is in the neighbourhood.&quot; She blushed, then added: &quot;Tell him it will give me great pleasure.&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;I will be sure to do so. Adieu!&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;I will not say that; come again, very soon.&quot;</p>
<p>The next year, one very hot Sunday, all the details of that memorable adventure suddenly came back to him so clearly that he revisited the &quot;private room&quot; in the wood, and was overwhelmed with astonishment when he went in. She was sitting on the grass, looking very sad, while by her side, again in his shirt-sleeves, the young man with the yellow hair was sleeping soundly, like some brute.</p>
<p>She grew so pale when she saw Henri, that at first he thought she was going to faint; then, however, they began to talk quite naturally, as if there had never been anything between them. But when he told her that he was very fond of that spot, and went there very often on Sundays, to dream of old memories, she looked into his eyes for a long time. &quot;I, too, think of it every evening,&quot; she replied.</p>
<p>&quot;Come, my dear,&quot; her husband said, with a yawn; &#8220;I think it is time for us to be going.&#39;</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
