<h2>Berthe</h2>
<p>My old friend sometimes one has friends much older than oneself - my old friend Doctor Bonnet had often invited me to stay with him at his house at Riom. I did not know Auvergne at all, and I decided to go and see him about the middle of the summer of 1876.</p>
<p>I arrived on the morning train, and the first figure I saw upon the station platform was the doctor&#39;s. He was dressed in grey, and wore a round black broad-brimmed soft felt hat, whose very high crown narrowed as it rose, like the chimney of an anthracite stove; it was a true Auvergne hat, and positively smelt of charcoal-burning. Clad thus, the doctor had the appearance of an old young man, with his slender body wrapped in the light-coloured coat, and his large head with its white hair.</p>
<p>He embraced me with the manifest pleasure of a provincial greeting the arrival of a long-desired friend. Extending his arm and pointing all round him he exclaimed proudly:</p>
<p>&quot;Here is Auvergne.&quot;</p>
<p>I saw nothing but a line of mountains in front of me, whose summits, like truncated cones, must have been extinct volcanoes.</p>
<p>Then, raising his finger towards the name of the town written upon the front of the station, he said: &quot;Riom, fatherland of magistrates, pride of the law courts, which should rather have been the fatherland of doctors.&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;Why?&quot; I asked.</p>
<p>&quot;Why?&quot; he answered with a laugh. &quot;Turn the name round and you have &#39;mori&#39; to die. . That&#39;s why I installed myself in this neighbourhood, young man.&#39;</p>
<p>And, delighted with his jest, he led me away, rubbing his hands.</p>
<p>As soon as I had swallowed a cup of coffee, I had to go and see the old city. I admired the chemist&#39;s house, and the other notable houses, all black, but as pretty as toy houses, with their fronts of carved stone. I admired the statue of the Virgin, patron saint of butchers, and even heard, in this connection, the story of an amusing adventure which I will relate some other day, when Doctor Bonnet said to me:</p>
<p>&quot;Now I must beg five minutes in which to go and see a patient, and then I will take you up the hill of Ch&#226;tel-Guyon, so as to show you, before lunch, the general view of the town and of the whole range of the Puy-de-D&#244;me. You can wait on the pavement; I&#39;m only going straight up and down again.&#39;</p>
<p>He left me opposite one of those old provincial mansions, dark, closed, silent, gloomy. This one seemed to me to have a particularly melancholy physiognomy, and I soon discovered the reason. All the large windows on the first floor were blocked up to half their height by stout wooden shutters. Only the top halves opened, as though someone had wished to prevent the creatures shut up in this vast stone box from seeing into the street.</p>
<p>When the doctor came down again, I told him what I had noticed.</p>
<p>&quot;You were not mistaken,&quot; he replied; &quot;the poor creature shut up in there must never see what is going on outside. She&#39;s a madwoman, or rather an idiot, or an imbecile - what you Normans call a &#39;Niente.&#39; &quot;Yes, it&#39;s a sad story, and an extraordinary pathological case into the bargain. Would you like me to tell it you?&quot;</p>
<p>I told him yes.</p>
<p>&quot;Well,&quot; he went on, &quot;here it is, then. Twenty years ago now, the owners of that house, my employers, had a child, a girl, just like any other girl.</p>
<p>&quot;But I soon saw that although the body of the little creature was developing admirably, her intelligence was remaining dormant.</p>
<p>&#8220;She walked at a very early age, but she absolutely refused to speak. At first I thought her deaf; then, later, I found out that she could hear perfectly, but did not understand. Violent noises made her tremble; they frightened her, but she could never trace the cause of them.</p>
<p>&quot;She grew up; she was superb, and dumb, dumb through lack of intelligence. I tried every means to bring a gleam of light into her brain; nothing was of avail. I fancied that she recognised her nurse; once weaned, she did not recognise her mother. She never knew how to speak that word, the first uttered by children, the last murmured by soldiers dying on the battlefield: &#39;Mother.&#39; Sometimes she attempted inarticulate mutterings, but nothing more.</p>
<p>&quot;When the weather was fine, she laughed all the time, uttering gentle cries like the twittering of a bird; when it rained, she wept and groaned in a melancholy, terrifying way like the mourning of dogs howling round a corpse.</p>
<p>&quot;She liked to roll in the grass like a young animal, and run about like a mad creature, and every morning she clapped her hands if she saw the sun coming into her room. When the window was opened, she clapped her hands and moved about in her bed, so as to make them dress her at once.</p>
<p>&quot;She seemed to draw no distinction between people, between her mother and her servant, between her father and me, between the coachman and the cook.</p>
<p>&quot;I was fond of her unhappy parents, and went to see them almost every day. I often dined with them, which made me notice that Berthe (she had been named Berthe) appeared to recognise the dishes and prefer some to others.</p>
<p>&quot;She was twelve years old at that time. She looked like a girl of eighteen, and was taller than I am.</p>
<p>&quot;So the idea came into my head of developing her greed, and of attempting by this means to introduce a sense of difference into her mind, of forcing her, by the difference between tastes, by the scale of flavours, if not to think, at least to make instinctive distinctions, which would be if nothing else a physical stirring of her brain.</p>
<p>&quot;In appealing to her senses, and carefully choosing those which would best serve our purpose, we were bound to produce a sort of recoil of the body upon the intelligence, and thus gradually augment the insentient working of her brain.</p>
<p>&quot;One day, therefore, I set in front of her two plates, one of soup, one of very sweet vanilla custard. I made her taste them alternately. Then I left her free to make a choice. She ate the plateful of custard.</p>
<p>&quot;I soon made her very greedy, so greedy that she seemed to have nothing in her head but the idea, or rather the desire, of eating. She recognised dishes perfectly, holding out her hand towards those which she liked and eagerly seizing them. She cried when they were taken away.</p>
<p>&quot;Then I had the notion of teaching her to come to the dining-room at the sound of the bell. It took a long time, but I succeeded. In her vague understanding became firmly established a connection between the sound and the taste, a relation between two senses, an appeal from one to the other, and consequently a kind of concatenation of ideas, if one can call this sort of instinctive link between two organic functions an idea.</p>
<p>&quot;I carried my experiment still further, and taught her - with what pains! - to recognise mealtimes on the dial of the clock.</p>
<p>&quot;For a long time I was unable to call her attention to the hands, but I succeeded in making her notice the striking mechanism. The method I employed was simple: I stopped the ringing of the bell, and everyone rose to go to table when the little brass hammer struck twelve.</p>
<p>&quot;I tried in vain to teach her to count the strokes. Every time she heard the chime she ran to the door; but little by little she must have realised that all the chimes had not the same value with regard to meals; and her eye, guided by her ear, was often fixed upon the dial.</p>
<p>&quot;Noticing this, I took care to go every day at twelve and at six, and as soon as it came to the moment she was waiting for, I placed my finger on the figure twelve and on the figure six. I soon observed that she was following attentively the advance of the little brass hands, which I had often pushed round in her presence.</p>
<p>&quot;She had understood! Or, it would be truer to say, she had grasped it. I had succeeded in awakening in her the knowledge, or rather the sensation, of time, in the same way as one succeeds with carp, though they have not the advantage of clocks, by feeding them at exactly the same moment every day.</p>
<p>&#39;Once this result had been attained, all the timepieces in the house occupied her attention to the exclusion of everything else. She spent her life in looking at them, listening to them, waiting for the hours. A rather funny incident happened. The strike of a pretty Louis XVI clock, that was hanging over the head of her bed, ran down, and she noticed it. For twenty minutes she stared at the hands, waiting for ten o&#39;clock to strike. But when the hand had passed the figure, she was left bewildered at hearing nothing, so bewildered that she remained sitting there, stirred no doubt by one of those strong emotions which lay hold on us in the face of great catastrophes. And she had the curious patience to sit in front of that little instrument until eleven o&#39;clock, to see what would happen. Again she heard nothing, very naturally. Then, seized abruptly with the mad rage of a creature deceived and tricked, or with the terror inspired by a frightful mystery, or with the furious impatience of a passionate creature confronted by an obstacle, she seized the tongs from the fireplace and struck the clock with such force that she smashed it to pieces instantly.</p>
<p>&quot;Her brain worked then, and calculated, in an obscure way, it is true, and within a very limited range, for I could not make her distinguish between people as she did between hours. In order to produce a stirring of intelligence in her mind, it was necessary to appeal to her passions, in the physical sense of the word.</p>
<p>&quot;We soon had another proof of this; alas! it was a terrible one.</p>
<p>&quot;She had grown into a superb creature; she was a true type of the race, an admirable stupid Venus.</p>
<p>&quot;She was now sixteen, and I have rarely seen such perfection of form, suppleness, and regularity of features. I said she was a Venus; so she was, a fair, full-figured, vigorous Venus, with large eyes, clear and empty, blue like flax-flowers, and a large mouth with round, greedy, sensual lips, a mouth made for kisses.</p>
<p>&quot;One morning her father came into my room with a curious expression, and sat down without even replying to my greeting.</p>
<p>&quot;I want to speak to you about a very serious matter,&#39; he said. &#39;Could</p>
<p>Berthe get married?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I started with surprise.</p>
<p>&quot;Berthe get married!&#39; I exclaimed. &#39;It&#39;s im possible!&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Yes,&#39; he resumed, &#39;I know . but think, doctor hoped if she had children see you perhaps we had it would be</p>
<p>&#183;</p>
<p>&#8226; &#8226;</p>
<p>a great shock for her, a great happiness and who knows whether motherhood might not awaken her intelligence?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I was very perplexed. It was true. It was possible that the novelty of the experience, the wonderful maternal instinct which throbs in the hearts of beasts as strongly as in the hearts of women, which makes the hen fling herself upon the jaws of the dog in order to protect her little ones, might lead to a revolution, a violent disturbance in that dormant brain, might even set going the motionless mechanism of her mind.</p>
<p>&quot;Suddenly, too, I remembered an example from my own experience. Some years previously I had owned a little bitch, a retriever, so stupid that I could get nothing out of her. She had puppies, and became in one day, not intelligent, but almost the equal of many poorly developed dogs.</p>
<p>&quot;I had scarcely perceived this possibility before the longing increased in me to get Berthe married, not so much out of friendship for her and for her poor parents as out of scientific curiosity. What would happen? It was a strange problem.</p>
<p>&quot;So I said to the father:</p>
<p>&quot;You may be right</p>
<p>. we might try try by all means but. but you&#39;ll never</p>
<p>&#8226; &#183;</p>
<p>find a man who&#39;ll consent to it.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I have found one,&#39; he said in a low voice.</p>
<p>&quot;I was amazed.</p>
<p>&quot;A decent fellow?&#39; I stammered. &#39;A man in your own walk of life?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;&#39;Yes. absolutely,&#39; he replied.</p>
<p>&quot;Ah.</p>
<p>And... might I ask you his name?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I was just coming to tell you and ask your advice. It is Monsieur Gaston du Boys de Lucelles.&#39; &quot;I nearly exclaimed: &#39;The swine!&#39; but I kept my mouth shut, and after a pause I murmured:</p>
<p>&#8220;Yes, quite all right. I see no obstacle.&#39; &quot;The poor man shook my hand. &quot;They shall be married next month,&#39; he said.</p>
<p>&quot;Monsieur Gaston du Boys de Lucelles was a young scamp of good family who had consumed his paternal inheritance and had run into debt in a thousand disreputable ways; he was now hunting for a new method of obtaining money.</p>
<p>&quot;He had found this one.</p>
<p>&quot;He was a good-looking lad, well set up, but a rake, one of the loathsome tribe of provincial rakes. He seemed to give promise of being an adequate husband, and one that an allowance would easily remove again.</p>
<p>&quot;He came to the house to press his suit and show himself off before the beautiful idiot, whom he seemed to like. He brought her flowers, kissed her hands, sat at her feet and gazed at her with tender eyes; but she took no notice of any of his attentions, and in no way distinguished him from any of the people among whom she lived.</p>
<p>&quot;The marriage took place.</p>
<p>&quot;You will understand to what a degree my curiosity was inflamed.</p>
<p>&quot;The next day I went to see Berthe, to judge from her face whether any inner part of her had been stirred. But I found her just the same as on other days, solely preoccupied with the clock and dinner. Her husband, on the contrary, seemed very fond of her, and tried to rouse her gaiety and affection by little teasing games such as one plays with kittens.</p>
<p>&quot;He had found nothing better.</p>
<p>&quot;I then started to pay frequent visits to the newly married couple, and I soon perceived that the young woman recognised her husband and directed upon him the greedy looks which hitherto she had lavished only upon sweet things to eat.</p>
<p>&quot;She followed his movements, distinguished his step on the stairs, or in a neighbouring room, clapped her hands when he came in, and her transfigured countenance burned with a flame of profound happiness and desire.</p>
<p>&quot;She loved him with all her body, with all her soul, her poor feeble soul, with all her heart, the poor heart of a grateful animal.</p>
<p>&quot;She was truly an admirable innocent picture of simple passion, of passion at once carnal and modest, such as nature had set in human beings before man complicated and distorted it with all the subtleties of sentiment.</p>
<p>&quot;As for the man, he quickly wearied of the beautiful, passionate, dumb creature. He no longer spent more than a few hours of each day with her, finding it enough to devote his nights to her.</p>
<p>&quot;And she began to suffer.</p>
<p>&quot;From morning to night she waited for him, her eyes fixed on the clock, not even paying attention to meals, for he always went away for his meals, to Clermont, Ch&#226;tel-Guyon, Royat, anywhere so as not to be at home.</p>
<p>&quot;She grew thin.</p>
<p>&quot;Every other thought, every other desire, every other interest, every other vague hope, vanished from her mind; the hours in which she did not see him became for her hours of terrible torment. Soon he began to sleep away from her. He spent his nights at the Casino at Royat with women, coming home early at the first gleam of day.</p>
<p>&quot;She refused to go to bed before he returned. She stayed motionless on a chair, her eyes vaguely fixed on the little brass hands which turned round and round in slow, regular progress, round the china dial whereon the hours were inscribed.</p>
<p>&quot;She heard the distant trotting of his horse, and would start up with a bound; then, when he came into the room, she would raise her fingers to the clock with a ghostly gesture, as though to say to him: &#39;Look how late it is!&#39; He began to be afraid in the presence of this loving, jealous idiot; he became possessed of a slow resentment, as an animal might be. One night he struck her.</p>
<p>&quot;I was sent for. She was screaming in a terrible fit of grief, rage, passion, I knew not what. How can one tell what is going on in these rudimentary brains?</p>
<p>&quot;I calmed her with injections of morphine; and I forbade her ever to see the man again, for I real ised that the marriage would inevitably end in her <br/>death. <br/></p>
<p>&quot;Then she went mad! Yes, my dear fellow, that idiot girl went mad. She thinks of him always, and waits for him. She waits for him all day and all night, every moment, waking or sleeping, perpetually. As I saw her growing thinner and thinner, and as her obstinate gaze never left the faces of the clocks, I had all these instruments for measuring time removed from the house. Thus I have taken from her the possibility of counting the hours, and of for ever searching her dim memory for the moment at which once upon a time he had been wont to come home. I hope in the long run to kill the remembrance of it in her, and to extinguish the spark of reason that I took such trouble to set alight.</p>
<p>&quot;The other day I tried an experiment. I offered her my watch. She took it and studied it for some time; then she began to scream in a terrible way, as though the sight of the little instrument had suddenly reawakened the memory that was beginning to slumber.</p>
<p>&quot;She is thin in these days, pitifully thin, with shining hollow eyes. She walks up and down unceasingly, like a caged beast.</p>
<p>&quot;I have had two bars put on the windows, have put up high screens, and have fixed the chairs to the floor, to prevent her from looking into the street to see if he is coming back.</p>
<p>&quot;Oh, the poor parents! What a life they have and will have had!&quot;</p>
<p>We had arrived at the top of the hill; the doctor turned round and said to me:</p>
<p>&quot;Look at Riom from here.&quot;</p>
<p>The sombre town wore the aspect of an ancient walled city. In the background, as far as the eye could reach, stretched a green, wooded plain, dotted with villages and towns, and drowned in a thin blue vapour which made the horizon a delight to the eyes. On the right, in the distance, was a line of high mountains with a succession of peaks, rounded or cut off sharply as with a sword-cut.</p>
<p>The doctor began to enumerate the places and peaks, telling me the history of each.</p>
<p>But I did not listen to him; I thought only of the mad woman, saw nothing but her. She seemed to hover like a melancholy ghost over all this wide country.</p>
<p>&quot;What has become of the husband?&quot; I asked abruptly.</p>
<p>My friend, somewhat surprised, answered after a pause:</p>
<p>&quot;He&#39;s living at Royat on the allowance made to him. He&#39;s happy; he leads a gay life.&quot;</p>
<p>As we were walking slowly homewards, both of us saddened and silent, an English dog-cart passed us from behind, a fast-trotting thoroughbred in the shafts.</p>
<p>The doctor gripped my arm.</p>
<p>&quot;There he is,&quot; he said.</p>
<p>I saw nothing but a grey felt hat, tilted over one ear, above a pair of broad shoulders, disappearing in a cloud of dust.</p>
<p>MY</p>
<p>Y mistress at that time was a funny little woman. She was married, of course, for I&#39;ve a perfect horror of unmarried women. After all, what pleasure can one have in possessing a woman who has the double disadvantage of belonging to no one and belonging to everyone? And honestly, quite apart from the moral side of the question, I can&#39;t understand love as a profession. It rather disgusts me. It&#39;s a weakness, I know, and I confess it.</p>
<p>The chiefest pleasure enjoyed by a bachelor who has a married woman for his mistress, is that she provides him with a home, a comfortable, pleasant home in which everyone looks after him and spoils him, from the husband to the servants. Every pleasure is there united, love, friendship, even paternity, the bed and the table, which constitute the final happiness of life, together with the incalculable advantage of being able to change your household from time to time, of installing yourself by turns in every different class of family, in the country, during the summer, in the home of the workman who lets you a room in his house; in the middle-class home of the provincial, during the winter, even in the homes of the aristocracy, if you are ambitious.</p>
<p>I have another weakness: I like my mistresses&#39; husbands. I admit that there are husbands, vulgar or coarse, who fill me with disgust for their wives, however charming these may be. But when the husband has wit or charm, I fall inevitably desperately in love. I am careful, if I break with the woman, not to break with the husband. In this way I have made my best friends, and in this manner I have oft-times verified the incontestable superiority of the male over the female of the human species. The latter causes you every possible worry, makes scenes, reproaches you, and so forth; the former, who has quite as much right to complain, treats you, on the contrary, as though you were providence fallen at his fireside.</p>
<p>Well, my mistress was a funny little woman, dark, fantastic, capricious, religious, superstitious, credulous as a monk, but charming. Above all, she had a way of kissing which I have never found in another woman . . . but this is not the place. . And such a soft skin! I derived infinite pleasure merely from holding her hand! And her eyes. Her gaze passed over you like a slow caress, delicious and endless. Often I laid my head on her knees, and we remained motionless, she bending over me with that faint, enigmatic, disturbing little smile that women have, I lifting my eyes towards her, receiving like wine poured gently and deliciously into my heart, the shining gaze of her blue eyes, bright as though filled with thoughts of love, blue like a heaven of delights.</p>
<p>Her husband, a civil servant, was often away, leaving our evenings free. Often I spent them at her house, lying on the divan, my forehead pressed against one of her legs, while upon the other slept a huge black cat named &quot;Misti,&quot; which she adored. Our fingers met on the animal&#39;s muscular back, and caressed one another amid its silky hair. I felt against my cheek its warm flank, throbbing with a perpetual &quot;purr-purr.&quot; Sometimes it would stretch out a paw to my mouth, or set five unsheathed claws upon my eyelids, whose points pricked my eyes and made me close them in a flash.</p>
<p>Sometimes we went out to enjoy what we called our escapades. As a matter of fact they were very innocent. They consisted in supping at an outlying inn, or else, after we had dined at her house or mine, of visiting low taverns, like students on the spree.</p>
<p>We went to the lowest drinking-places and sat down at the far end of smoky dens, on rickety chairs, at an old wooden table. A cloud of acrid smoke, which smelled still of the fried fish eaten at dinner, filled the room; men in blouses talked noisily and drank brandy; and the astonished waiter served us with cherries in brandy.</p>
<p>Trembling with delicious terror, she would raise her little black veil, folded double, to the tip of her nose, where it rested, and begin to drink with the pleasure of committing a delightful crime. Each cherry she swallowed gave her the sense of a sin committed, each sip of the coarse liquor ran down her throat like a delicate, forbidden pleasure.</p>
<p>Then she would say to me in a low voice: &quot;Let us go.&quot; And we left. She went out quickly, her head lowered, with short steps, between the drinkers who watched her pass with resentful glances; and when we found ourselves out in the street again, she would utter a deep sigh as though we had just escaped from dreadful peril.</p>
<p>Sometimes she asked me with a shudder: &quot;If I were insulted in one of these places, what would you do?&quot; And I would reply in a swaggering tone: &#39;Why, defend you, damn it.&quot; And she would squeeze my arm in her happiness, with a vague wish, perhaps, to be insulted and defended, to see those men, even those ruffians, fight me for her.</p>
<p>One evening, as we were seated at a table in a Montmartre den, we saw a ragged old woman come in, holding in her hand a greasy pack of cards. Observing a lady, the old woman promptly came up to us, offering to tell my companion&#39;s fortune. Emma, whose mind believed anything and everything, shivered with pleasure and uneasiness, and made room beside her for the hag.</p>
<p>The ancient wrinkled woman, with rings of raw flesh round her eyes and an empty, toothless mouth, set out her dirty cards on the table. She made them into heaps, picked them up, and set them out again, muttering inaudible words. Emma listened, pale, breathing quickly, panting with distress and curiosity.</p>
<p>The sorceress began to speak; she made vague predictions: happiness and children, a fair young man, a journey, money, a lawsuit, a dark gentle man, the return of a friend, a success, a death. <br/>The announcement of this death struck the young <br/>woman. Whose death? <br/>       Whose death? When? How? <br/></p>
<p>  &quot;As to that,&quot; replied the old woman, &quot;the cards <br/>are not strong enough; you must come and see me <br/>to-morrow. I&#39;ll tell you with the coffee-mark, <br/>which never fails.&quot; <br/></p>
<p>Emma turned anxiously to me.</p>
<p>&quot;We may go to-morrow, mayn&#39;t we? Oh, please say yes! If not, you don&#39;t know how it will torment me.&#39;</p>
<p>I began to laugh. <br/>&quot;We&#39;ll go if <br/>           you want to, darling.&quot; <br/>The old woman gave us her address. <br/></p>
<p>  She lived on the sixth floor of an awful house <br/>behind the Buttes-Chaumont. <br/></p>
<p>We went there the next day.</p>
<p>Her room, a garret with two chairs and a bed, was full of strange things - bunches of herbs hanging from nails, dried animals, bottles and phials containing various coloured liquids. On the table a stuffed black cat stared with glass eyes. He looked like the familiar spirit of this sinister dwelling.</p>
<p>Emma, faint with excitement, sat down, and said at once:</p>
<p>&quot;Oh, darling, look at the cat! Isn&#39;t he just like Misti ?&quot;</p>
<p>And she explained to the old woman that she herself had a cat just like that one; oh, exactly like it.</p>
<p>&quot;If you love a man,&quot; replied the sorceress solemnly, &quot;you must not keep it.&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;Why not?&quot; asked Emma, struck with terror. The old woman sat down beside her in a familiar way, and took her hand.</p>
<p>&quot;It&#39;s the sorrow of my life,&quot; she said.</p>
<p>My friend was eager to hear. She pressed the old woman to tell her, questioned her, urged her: the superstitious credulity they shared made them sisters in mind and heart. At last the fortune-teller made up her mind.</p>
<p>&quot;I loved that cat,&quot; she said, &quot;like a brother. I was young in those days, and all alone; I did sewing at home. Monton was all I had. A lodger gave him to me. He was as clever as a child, and gentle too; he idolised me, dear lady, he idolised me more than a fetish. All day long he purred in my lap, all night on my pillow; I felt his heart beat, I did.</p>
<p>&quot;Well, I made friends with a man, a nice boy who worked at a linendraper&#39;s. It went on for three months without my granting him anything. But you know how it is, one weakens &#8212; it happens to everybody; and besides, I had begun to love him, that I had. He was so nice, so nice and kind. He wanted us to live together all the time, for economy. At last I let him come and see me one evening. I hadn&#39;t made up my mind, oh, dear, no! but I liked the idea of being together for an hour.</p>
<p>&quot;At the beginning he was very well-behaved. He said pretty things to me which stirred my heart. Then he kissed me, madame, gave me a lover&#39;s kiss. I had shut my eyes and remained in a sort of paralysis of happiness. Suddenly I felt that he&#39;d made a violent movement, and he screamed, a scream I shall never forget. I opened my eyes and saw that Monton had flown at his face and was tearing his skin with his claws, like a rag of linen. And the blood was streaming down, madame.</p>
<p>&quot;I tried to pull the cat off, but he held tight, and went on scratching, and even bit me, he was so far out of his senses. At last I got hold of him and threw him out of the window, which was open, since it was summer.</p>
<p>&quot;When I began to wash my poor friend&#39;s face, I saw that he had lost his eyes, both eyes.</p>
<p>&quot;He had to go to the hospital. He died of misery a year after. I wanted to have him with me and feed him, but he would not. He seemed to hate me after it had happened.</p>
<p>&quot;As for Monton, he broke his back in the fall. The porter had picked up the body. I had him stuffed, since I still felt attached to him. If he had done that, it was because he loved me, wasn&#39;t it?&quot;</p>
<p>The old woman was silent, and stroked the dead beast with her hand; the carcass shook on its wire skeleton.</p>
<p>Emma, her heart wrung, had forgotten the predicted death. At any rate, she said nothing more about it, and went away after giving the woman five francs.</p>
<p>Her husband came back the next day, and so several days passed before I saw her.</p>
<p>When I visited her again, I was surprised not to see Misti. I asked where he was.</p>
<p>She blushed, and replied: &quot;I</p>
<p>gave him away.</p>
<p>I wasn&#39;t happy about him.&quot;</p>
<p>I was surprised.</p>
<p>&quot;Not happy? Not happy? What about?&quot; She gave me a long kiss, and murmured in a low voice:</p>
<p>&quot;I was afraid for your eyes, darling.&quot;</p>
