<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title/>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="country-courts" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Country Courts</h2>
			<p>The courthouse of the Gorgeville justice of the peace is full of country folk, seated impassively round the walls, awaiting the opening of the court.</p>
			<p>Among them are large and small, ruddy fat fellows and thin ones looking as though they were carved out of a block of apple wood. They have placed their baskets on the ground, and there they sit placidly, silent, absorbed in their own affairs. They have brought with them the smells of the stable, of sweat, of sour milk and manure. Flies are buzzing about under the white ceiling. Through the open door you can hear the cocks crowing.</p>
			<p>On a kind of platform stands a long table, covered with a green cloth. Seated at the very end on the left, a wrinkled old man is writing. At the end on the right, a policeman, stiffly erect in his chair, is gazing vacantly into space. On the bare wall, a large wooden Christ, writhing in an anguished attitude, seems still to offer up his eternal agony on behalf of these louts who smell of beasts.</p>
			<p>His Honour the Justice of the Peace at length enters the court. Corpulent, and ruddy-complexioned, with every quick step of his fat hurried body he jerks his large black magistrate’s robe: he sits down, places his cap on the table, and looks round the assembled company with an air of deep disgust.</p>
			<p>He is a provincial scholar, a local wit, one of those who translate Horace, relish the minor verse of Voltaire, and know “Vert-Vert” by heart as well as the obscene poems of Parny.</p>
			<p>He opens proceedings.</p>
			<p>“Now then, Monsieur Potel, call the cases.”</p>
			<p>Then, with a smile, he murmurs:</p>
			<p>“<i>Quidquid tentabam dicere versus erat.</i>”</p>
			<p>The clerk of the court, raising his bald head, stammers out in an unintelligible voice: “<i>Madame Victorie Bascule versus Isidore Paturon.</i>”</p>
			<p>A huge woman comes forward, a country woman, a woman from the county town, wearing a beribboned hat, a watch-chain festooned across her stomach, rings on her fingers, and earrings shining like lighted candles.</p>
			<p>The justice of the peace greets her with a glance of recognition not without a gleam of mockery, and says:</p>
			<p>“Madame Bascule, enumerate your complaints.”</p>
			<p>The party of the other part stands on the opposite side. It is represented by three people. In the middle a young peasant, twenty-five years of age, chubby as an apple and red as a poppy in the corn. On his right, his wife, quite young, puny, slight, very like a bantam hen, with a flat narrow head, crowned as with a crest by a rose-coloured bonnet. She has a round eye, apprehensive and choleric, which looks out sideways like a bird’s. On the boy’s left stands his father, an old bent man, whose twisted body is lost in his starched smock, as if it were under a bell-glass.</p>
			<p>Madame Bascule holds forth:</p>
			<p>“Your Honour, for fifteen years I have looked after this boy here. I have brought him up and loved him like a mother, I have done everything for him, I have made a man of him. He had promised me, he had sworn never to leave me, he even drew up a deed to say so, in return for which I have given him a small property, my bit of land in Bec-de-Mortin, which is valued in the six thousands. And now that baggage, that low-down good-for-nothing, that dirty hussy⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p><i>The Justice of the Peace</i>: “Restrain yourself, Madame Bascule.”</p>
			<p><i>Madame Bascule</i>: “A miserable⁠ ⁠… a miserable⁠ ⁠… I know quite well she has turned his head, has done I don’t know what to him, no, I really don’t know what⁠ ⁠… and he is going to marry her, the fool, the great blockhead, and he will bring her my property as a dowry, my bit of land in Bec-de-Mortin.⁠ ⁠… But not if I know it, not if I know it⁠ ⁠… I have a paper, there it is.⁠ ⁠… Let him give me back my property, then. We made a lawyer’s deed for safety’s sake, and a private agreement on paper for friendship’s sake. One is as good as the other. Each has his rights, isn’t that true?” (She holds out to the justice of the peace a stamped paper opened out wide.)</p>
			<p><i>Isidore Paturon</i>: “It’s not true.”</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i>: “Silence! You shall speak in due course.” (He reads.)</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“I, the undersigned, Isidore Paturon, promise by these presents my benefactress, Madame Bascule, never to leave her during my life, and to serve her with devotion.</p>
				<p>“Gorgeville, August 5th, 1883.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p><i>The Justice</i>: “There is a cross for signature: you don’t know how to write, then?”</p>
			<p><i>Isidore</i>: “No. Can’t write a bit.”</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i>: “It was you who made it⁠—this cross?”</p>
			<p><i>Isidore</i>: “No. Not me.”</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i>: “Who did make it, then?”</p>
			<p><i>Isidore</i>: “She did.”</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i>: “You are prepared to take your oath that you did not make this cross?”</p>
			<p><i>Isidore</i> (in an outburst): “By my dad’s head, my ma’s, my grandfer’s, my gran’ma’s, and the good God’s, who hears me, I swear it isn’t me.” (He raises his hands and spits aside to emphasize his oath.)</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i> (smiling): “What then were your relations with Madame Bascule, here present?”</p>
			<p><i>Isidore</i>: “She served me for a whore.” (Laughter in court.)</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i>: “Restrain your language. You mean that your relations were not so innocent as she claims.”</p>
			<p><i>Paturon, Senior</i> (breaking in): “He wasn’t fifteen, not fifteen, your Honour, when she debouched him⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i>: “You mean ‘debauched’?”</p>
			<p><i>The Father</i>: “How do I know? He wasn’t fifteen years old. And she’d fed him out of her own hand for four years then, stuffed him like a fatted fowl, crammed him with food fit to burst, saving your Honour. And then when the time came that he seemed to her ready, she disrupted him⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i>: “Corrupted.⁠ ⁠… And you let it happen?”</p>
			<p><i>The Father</i>: “It was her or some other woman, it was bound to happen!⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i>: “Very well, then, what do you complain of?”</p>
			<p><i>The Father</i>: “Nothing! Oh, I’ve nothing to complain of myself, nothing, only that he doesn’t want any more of it himself, and he is quit of her. I demand protection according to the law.”</p>
			<p><i>Madame Bascule</i>: “These people are heaping lies on me, your Honour. I made a man of him.”</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i>: “Quite!”</p>
			<p><i>Madame Bascule</i>: “And he is going back on me, deserting me, stealing my property.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p><i>Isidore</i>: “It isn’t true, your Honour. I wanted to leave her five years ago, because she had fattened beyond all bounds, and that didn’t suit me a bit. That displeased me, and why not? Didn’t I say to her then I was going to leave her? And then she wept like a gutter-spout and promised me her property at Bec-de-Mortin to stay a few more years, only four or five. Of course I said ‘Yes,’ for sure. What would you have done yourself?</p>
			<p>“So I stayed five years, every day and every hour of it. I had kept my promise. Give the devil his due! That was full value, that was!”</p>
			<p>Isidore’s wife, silent till then, cries out with the piercing scream of a parrot:</p>
			<p>“Just look at her, look at her, your Honour, the old haystack, and say if that wasn’t full value!”</p>
			<p>The father nodded his head as one convinced, and repeated:</p>
			<p>“Gosh, yes, full value that!” (Madame Bascule subsides on the bench behind her, and begins to weep.)</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i> (in a fatherly tone): “What did you expect, my good woman? I can do nothing. You have given him your bit of land at Bec-de-Mortin by deed in a perfectly legal way. It is his, absolutely his. He has an indisputable right to do what he has done, and to bring it to his wife as dowry. I am not going to embark on questions of⁠ ⁠… of⁠ ⁠… delicacy. I can only regard the facts from the point of view of the law. I can do absolutely nothing in the matter.”</p>
			<p><i>Father Paturon</i> (proudly): “It’ll be all right to get back home, then?”</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i>: “Certainly.” (They go out, followed by the sympathetic looks of the country folk, with the air of people who have won their case. Madame Bascule sobs on her bench.)</p>
			<p>The Justice (smiling): “Compose yourself, my good woman. Come now, come now, compose yourself⁠ ⁠… and⁠ ⁠… and if I have any advice to give you, it is, look for another⁠ ⁠… another pupil⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Madame Bascule (in the midst of her tears): “I shall never find one⁠ ⁠… never⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p><i>The Justice</i>: “I am sorry I cannot put you in the way of one.” (She throws a look of despair towards the Christ, suffering and writhing on the cross, then she rises and goes out, with mincing steps, hiccuping her discomfiture, hiding her face in her handkerchief.)</p>
			<p>The Justice turns towards his clerk, and in a bantering voice: “Calypso could not console herself for the departure of Ulysses.” Then, in solemn tones:</p>
			<p>“Call the next case.”</p>
			<p>The clerk to the court stammers out:</p>
			<p>“<i>Célestin Polyte Lecacheur⁠—Prosper Magloire Dieulafait</i>⁠ ⁠…”</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
