<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Mother and Daughter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="mother-and-daughter" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Mother and Daughter</h2>
			<p>“The Comtesse Samoris.”</p>
			<p>“That lady in black over there?”</p>
			<p>“The very one. She’s wearing mourning for her daughter, whom she killed.”</p>
			<p>“Come now! You don’t mean that seriously?”</p>
			<p>“Oh! it is a very simple story, without any crime in it, any violence.”</p>
			<p>“Then what really happened?”</p>
			<p>“Almost nothing. Many courtesans were born to be virtuous women, they say; and many women called virtuous were born to be courtesans⁠—is that not so? Now, Madame Samoris, who was born a courtesan, had a daughter born a virtuous woman, that’s all.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t quite understand you.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll explain what I mean. The Comtesse Samoris is one of those tinsel foreign women hundreds of whom are rained down every year on Paris. A Hungarian or Wallachian countess, or I know not what, she appeared one winter in apartments she had taken in the Champs Élysées, that quarter for adventurers and adventuresses, and opened her drawing-room to the first comer or to anyone that turned up.</p>
			<p>“I went there. Why? you will say. I really can’t tell you. I went there, as everyone goes to such places because the women are facile and the men are dishonest. You know that set composed of filibusters with varied decorations, all noble, all titled, all unknown at the embassies, with the exception of those who are spies. All talk of their honor without the slightest occasion for doing so, boast of their ancestors, tell you about their lives, braggarts, liars, sharpers, as dangerous as the false cards they have up their sleeves, as delusive as their name⁠—in short, the aristocracy of the bagnio.</p>
			<p>“I adore these people. They are interesting to study, interesting to know, amusing to understand, often clever, never commonplace like public functionaries. Their wives are always pretty, with a slight flavor of foreign roguery, with the mystery of their existence, half of it perhaps spent in a house of correction. They have, as a rule, magnificent eyes and incredible hair. I adore them also.</p>
			<p>“Madame Samoris is the type of these adventuresses, elegant, mature, and still beautiful. Charming feline creatures, you feel that they are vicious to the marrow of their bones. You find them very amusing when you visit them; they give card-parties; they have dances and suppers; in short, they offer you all the pleasures of social life.</p>
			<p>“And she had a daughter⁠—a tall, fine-looking girl, always ready for entertainments, always full of laughter and reckless gayety⁠—a true adventuress’s daughter⁠—but, at the same time, an innocent, unsophisticated, artless girl, who saw nothing, knew nothing, understood nothing of all the things that happened in her father’s house.”</p>
			<p>“How do you know about him?”</p>
			<p>“How do I know? That’s the funniest part of the business! One morning, there was a ring at my door, and my valet came up to tell me that <abbr>M.</abbr> Joseph Bonenthal wanted to speak to me. I said directly: ‘And who is this gentleman?’ My valet replied: ‘I don’t know, monsieur; perhaps ’tis someone that wants employment.’ And so it was. The man wanted me to take him as a servant. I asked him where he had been last. He answered: ‘With the Comtesse Samoris.’ ‘Ah!’ said I, ‘but my house is not a bit like hers.’ ‘I know that well, monsieur,’ he said, ‘and that’s the very reason I want to take service with monsieur. I’ve had enough of these people: a man may stay a little while with them, but he won’t remain long with them.’ I required an additional man servant at the time, and so I took him.</p>
			<p>“A month later, Mademoiselle Yveline Samoris died mysteriously, and here are all the details of her death I could gather from Joseph, who got them from his sweetheart, the Comtesse’s chambermaid:</p>
			<p>“It was a ball-night, and two newly-arrived guests were chatting behind a door. Mademoiselle Yveline, who had just been dancing, leaned against this door to get a little air.</p>
			<p>“They did not see her approaching; but she heard what they were saying. And this was what they said:</p>
			<p>“ ‘But who is the father of the girl?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘A Russian, it appears, Count Rouvaloff. He never comes near the mother now.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘And who is the reigning prince today?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘That English prince standing near the window; Madame Samoris adores him. But her adoration of anyone never lasts longer than a month or six weeks. Nevertheless, as you see, she has a large circle of admirers. All are called⁠—and nearly all are chosen. That kind of thing costs a good deal, but⁠—hang it, what can you expect?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘And where did she get this name of Samoris?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘From the only man perhaps that she ever loved⁠—a Jewish banker from Berlin who goes by the name of Samuel Morris.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘Good. Thanks. Now that I know all about her, and see her sort, I’m off!’</p>
			<p>“What a start there was in the brain of the young girl endowed with all the instincts of a virtuous woman! What despair overwhelmed that simple soul! What mental tortures quenched her endless gayety, her delightful laughter, her exulting satisfaction with life! What a conflict took place in that youthful heart up to the moment when the last guest had left! Those were things that Joseph could not tell me. But, the same night, Yveline abruptly entered her mother’s room just as the Comtesse was getting into bed, sent out the waiting-maid, who was close to the door, and, standing erect and pale, and with great staring eyes, she said:</p>
			<p>“ ‘Mamma, listen to what I heard a little while ago during the ball.’</p>
			<p>“And she repeated word for word the conversation just as I told it to you.</p>
			<p>“The Comtesse was so stupefied that she did not know what to say in reply, at first. When she recovered her self-possession, she denied everything, and called God to witness that there was no truth in the story.</p>
			<p>“The young girl went away, distracted but not convinced. And she watched her mother.</p>
			<p>“I remember distinctly the strange alteration that then took place in her. She was always grave and melancholy. She used to fix on us her great earnest eyes as if she wanted to read what was at the bottom of our hearts. We did not know what to think of her, and we used to maintain that she was looking out for a husband.</p>
			<p>“One evening her doubts were dispelled. She caught her mother with a lover. Thereupon she said coldly, like a man of business laying down the terms of an agreement:</p>
			<p>“ ‘Here is what I have determined to do, mamma: We will both go away to some little town⁠—or rather into the country. We will live there quietly as well as we can. Your jewelry alone may be called a fortune. If you wish to marry some honest man, so much the better; still better will it be if I can find one. If you don’t consent to do this, I will kill myself.’</p>
			<p>“This time, the Comtesse ordered her daughter to go to bed, and never to administer again this lecture so unbecoming in the mouth of a child towards her mother.</p>
			<p>“Yveline’s answer to this was: ‘I give you a month to reflect. If, at the end of that month, we have not changed our way of living, I will kill myself, since there is no other honorable issue left to my life.’</p>
			<p>“Then she took herself off.</p>
			<p>“At the end of a month, the Comtesse Samoris was giving balls and suppers just the same as ever. Yveline then, under the pretext that she had a bad toothache purchased a few drops of chloroform from a neighboring chemist. The next day she purchased more; and, every time she went out, she managed to procure small doses of the narcotic. She filled a bottle with it.</p>
			<p>“One morning she was found in bed, lifeless, and already quite cold, with a cotton mask over her face.</p>
			<p>“Her coffin was covered with flowers, the church was hung in white. There was a large crowd at the funeral ceremony.</p>
			<p>“Ah! well, if I had known⁠—but you never can know⁠—I would have married that girl, for she was infernally pretty.”</p>
			<p>“And what became of the mother?”</p>
			<p>“Oh! she shed a lot of tears over it. She has only begun to receive visits again for the past week.”</p>
			<p>“And what explanation is given of the girl’s death?”</p>
			<p>“Oh! ’tis pretended that it was an accident caused by a new stove, the mechanism of which got out of order. As a good many such accidents have happened, the thing looks probable enough.”</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
