<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title/>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="on-the-journey" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2>On the Journey</h2>
			<h3>I</h3>
			<p>The railway carriage was full as we left Cannes. We were chatting, for everybody was acquainted. As we passed Tarascon someone remarked: “Here’s the place where they assassinate people.”</p>
			<p>And we began to talk of the mysterious and untraceable murderer, who for the last two years had taken, from time to time, the life of a traveller. Everyone made his guess, everyone gave his opinion; the women shudderingly gazed at the dark night through the car windows, fearing suddenly to see a man’s head at the door. We all began telling frightful stories of terrible encounters, meetings with madmen in a flying-express, of hours passed opposite a suspected individual.</p>
			<p>Each man knew an anecdote to his credit, each one had intimidated, overpowered, and throttled some evildoer in most surprising circumstances, with an admirable presence of mind and audacity.</p>
			<p>A physician, who spent every winter in the south, desired, in his turn, to tell an adventure:</p>
			<p>“I,” said he, “never have had the luck to test my courage in an affair of this kind; but I knew a woman, now dead, one of my patients, to whom the most singular thing in the world happened, and also the most mysterious and pathetic.</p>
			<p>“She was Russian, the Comtesse Marie Baranow, a very great lady, of exquisite beauty. You know how beautiful Russian women are, or at least how beautiful they seem to us, with their fine noses, their delicate mouths, their eyes of an indescribable colour, a blue grey, and their cold grace, a little hard! They have something about them, mischievous and seductive, haughty and sweet, tender and severe, altogether charming to a Frenchman. At the bottom, it is, perhaps, the difference of race and of type which makes me see so much in them.</p>
			<p>“Her physician had seen for many years that she was threatened with a disease of the lungs, and had tried to persuade her to come to the south of France; but she obstinately refused to leave <abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg. Finally, last autumn, deeming her lost, the doctor warned her husband, who directed his wife to start at once for Mentone.</p>
			<p>“She took the train, alone in her car, her servants occupying another compartment. She sat by the door, a little sad, seeing the fields and villages pass, feeling very lonely, very desolate in life, without children, almost without relatives, with a husband whose love was dead and who cast her thus to the end of the world without coming with her, as they send a sick valet to the hospital.</p>
			<p>“At each station her servant Ivan came to see if his mistress wanted anything. He was an old domestic, blindly devoted, ready to execute any order she might give him.</p>
			<p>“Night fell, and the train rolled along at full speed. She could not sleep, being wearied and ner vous.</p>
			<p>“Suddenly the thought struck her to count the money which her husband had given her at the last minute, in French gold. She opened her little bag and emptied the shining flood of metal on her lap.</p>
			<p>“But all at once a breath of cold air struck her face. Surprised, she raised her head. The door had just opened. The Comtesse Marie, in terror, hastily threw a shawl over the money spread upon her lap, and waited. Some seconds passed, then a man in evening dress appeared, bareheaded, wounded on the hand, and panting. He closed the door, sat down, looked at his neighbor with gleaming eyes, and then wrapped a handkerchief around his wrist, which was bleeding.</p>
			<p>“The young woman felt herself fainting with fear. This man, surely, had seen her counting her money and had come to rob and kill her.</p>
			<p>“He kept gazing at her, breathless, his features convulsed, doubtless ready to spring upon her.</p>
			<p>“He suddenly said:</p>
			<p>“ ‘Madame, don’t be afraid!’</p>
			<p>“She made no response, being incapable of opening her mouth, hearing her heartbeats, and a buzzing in her ears.</p>
			<p>“He continued:</p>
			<p>“ ‘I am not a criminal, Madame.’</p>
			<p>“She continued to be silent, but by a sudden movement which she made, her knees meeting, the gold coins began to run to the floor as water runs from a spout.</p>
			<p>“The man, surprised, looked at this stream of metal, and he suddenly stooped to pick it up.</p>
			<p>“Terrified, she rose, casting her whole fortune on the carpet and ran to the door to leap out on to the track.</p>
			<p>“But he understood what she was going to do, and springing forward, seized her in his arms, seated her by force, and held her by the wrists.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Listen to me, Madame,’ said he, ‘I am not a criminal; the proof of it is that I am going to gather up this gold and return it to you. But I am a lost man, a dead man, if you do not assist me to the frontier. I cannot tell you more. In an pass hour we shall be at the last Russian station; in an hour and twenty minutes we shall cross the boundary of the Empire. If you do not help me I am lost. And yet I have neither killed anyone, nor robbed, nor done anything contrary to honour. This I swear to you. I cannot tell you more.’</p>
			<p>“And kneeling down he picked up the gold, even hunting under the seats for the last coins, which had rolled to a distance. Then, when the little leather bag was full again he gave it to his neighbour without saying a word, and returned to seat himself in the other corner of the compartment. Neither of them moved. She kept motionless and silent, still faint from terror, but gradually growing quieter. As for him, he did not make a gesture or a motion, but remained sitting erect, his eyes staring in front of him, very pale, as if he were dead. From time to time she threw a quick look at him, and as quickly turned her glance away. He appeared to be about thirty years of age, and was very handsome, with the air of a gentleman.</p>
			<p>“The train ran through the darkness, giving at intervals its shrill signals, now slowing up in its progress, and again starting off at full speed. But suddenly its progress slackened, and after several sharp whistles it came to a full stop.</p>
			<p>“Ivan appeared at the door for his orders.</p>
			<p>“The Comtesse Marie, her voice trembling, gave one last look at her companion; then she said to her servant, in a quick tone:</p>
			<p>“ ‘Ivan, you will return to the Comte; I do not need you any longer.’</p>
			<p>“The man, bewildered, opened his enormous eyes. He stammered:</p>
			<p>“ ‘But, my lady⁠—’</p>
			<p>“She replied:</p>
			<p>“ ‘No, you will not come with me; I have changed my mind. I wish you to stay in Russia. Here is some money for your return home. Give me your cap and cloak.’</p>
			<p>“The old servant, frightened, took off his cap and cloak, obeying without question, accustomed to the sudden whims and caprices of his masters. And he went away, with tears in his eyes.</p>
			<p>“The train started again, rushing toward the frontier.</p>
			<p>“Then the Comtesse Marie said to her neighbour:</p>
			<p>“ ‘These things are for you, Monsieur⁠—you are Ivan, my servant. I make only one condition to what I am doing: that is, that you shall not speak a word to me, neither to thank me, nor for anything whatsoever.’</p>
			<p>“The unknown bowed without uttering a syllable.</p>
			<p>“Soon the train stopped again, and officers in uniform visited the train.</p>
			<p>“The Comtesse handed them her papers and, pointing to the man seated at the end of the compartment, said:</p>
			<p>“ ‘That is my servant Ivan, whose passport is here.’</p>
			<p>“The train again started.</p>
			<p>“During the night they sat opposite each other, both silent.</p>
			<p>“When morning came, as they stopped at a German station, the unknown man got out; then, standing at the door, he said:</p>
			<p>“ ‘Pardon me, Madame, for breaking my promise, but as I have deprived you of a servant, it is proper that I should replace him. Have you need of anything?’</p>
			<p>“She replied coldly:</p>
			<p>“ ‘Go and find my maid.’</p>
			<p>“He went to summon her. Then he disappeared.</p>
			<p>“When she alighted at some station for luncheon she saw him at a distance looking at her. They finally arrived at Mentone.”</p>
			<h3>II</h3>
			<p>The doctor was silent for a second, and then resumed:</p>
			<p>“One day, while I was receiving patients in my office, a tall young man entered. He said to me:</p>
			<p>“ ‘Doctor, I have come to ask you news of the Comtesse Marie Baranow. I am a friend of her husband, although she does not know me.’</p>
			<p>“I answered:</p>
			<p>“ ‘She is lost. She will never return to Russia.’</p>
			<p>“And suddenly this man began to sob, then he rose and went out, staggering like a drunken man.</p>
			<p>“I told the Comtesse that evening that a stranger had come to make inquiries about her health. She seemed moved, and told me the story which I have just related to you. She added:</p>
			<p>“ ‘That man, whom I do not know at all, follows me now like my shadow. I meet him every time I go out. He looks at me in a strange way, but he has never spoken to me!’</p>
			<p>“She pondered a moment, then added:</p>
			<p>“ ‘Come, I’ll wager that he is under the window now.’</p>
			<p>“She left her reclining-chair, went to the window and drew back the curtain, and actually showed me the man who had come to see me, seated on a bench at the edge of the side wall with his eyes raised toward the house. He perceived us, rose, and went away without once turning around.</p>
			<p>“Then I understood a sad and surprising thing, the silent love of these two beings, who were not acquainted with each other.</p>
			<p>“He loved her with the devotion of a rescued animal, grateful and devoted to the death. He came every day to ask me, ‘How is she?’ understanding that I had guessed his feelings. And he wept frightfully when he saw her pass, weaker and paler every day.</p>
			<p>“She said to me:</p>
			<p>“ ‘I have never spoken but once to that singular man, and yet it seems as if I had known him for twenty years.’</p>
			<p>“And when they met she returned his bow with a serious and charming smile. I felt that⁠—although she was given up, and knew herself lost⁠—she was happy to be loved thus, with this respect and constancy, with this exaggerated poetry, with this devotion, ready for anything.</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless, faithful to her superexcited obstinacy, she absolutely refused to learn his name, to speak to him. She said:</p>
			<p>“ ‘No, no, that would spoil this strange friendship. We must remain strangers to each other.’</p>
			<p>“As for him, he was certainly a kind of Don Quixote, for he did nothing to bring himself closer to her. He intended to keep to the end the absurd promise never to speak to her which he had made in the railway carriage.</p>
			<p>“Often, during her long hours of weakness, she rose from her reclining-chair and partly opened the curtain to see whether he were there, beneath the window. When she had seen him, always motionless upon his bench, she went back and lay down with a smile upon her lips.</p>
			<p>“She died one day about ten o’clock. As I was leaving the hotel he came up to me with a distracted face; he had already heard the news.</p>
			<p>“ ‘I should like to see her, for one second, in your presence,’ said he.</p>
			<p>“I took him by the arm and went back into the house.</p>
			<p>“When he was beside the couch of the dead woman he seized her hand and kissed it long and tenderly and then fled away like a madman.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The doctor again was silent, then continued:</p>
			<p>“This is certainly the strangest railway adventure that I know. It must also be said that men sometimes do the maddest things.”</p>
			<p>A woman murmured, half aloud:</p>
			<p>“Those two people were not so crazy as you think. They were⁠—they were⁠—”</p>
			<p>But she could not continue, she was crying so. As we changed the conversation to calm her, we never knew what she had wished to say.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
