<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Relic</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-relic" epub:type="se:short-story z3998:letter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Relic</h2>
			<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">To the Abbé Louis d’Ennemare, at Soissons.</p>
			<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">My Dear Abbé:</p>
			<p>“My marriage with your cousin is broken off in the stupidest manner, on account of a stupid trick which I almost involuntarily played my intended, in my embarrassment, and I turn to you, my old schoolfellow, for you may be able to help me out of the difficulty. If you can, I shall be grateful to you until I die.</p>
			<p>“You know Gilberte, or rather you think you know her, for do we ever understand women? All their opinions, their ideas, their creeds, are a surprise to us. They are all full of twists and turns, of the unforeseen, of unintelligible arguments, or defective logic and of obstinate ideas, which seem final, but which they alter because a little bird came and perched on the window ledge.</p>
			<p>“I need not tell you that your cousin is very religious, as she was brought up by the White or Black Sisters at Nancy. You know that better than I do, but what you perhaps do not know, is, that she is just as excitable about other matters as she is about religion. Her head flies away, just like a leaf being whirled away by the wind; and she is a woman, or rather a girl, more so than many are, for she is moved, or made angry in a moment, starting off at a gallop after affection, just as she does after hatred, and returning in the same manner; and she is as pretty⁠ ⁠… as you know, and more charming than I can say⁠ ⁠… and in a way you can never know.</p>
			<p>“Well, we became engaged, and I adored her, as I adore her still, and she appeared to love me.</p>
			<p>“One evening, I received a telegram summoning me to Cologne for a consultation, which might be followed by a serious and difficult operation, and as I had to start the next morning, I went to wish Gilberte goodbye, and tell her why I could not dine with them on Wednesday, but on Friday, the day of my return. Ah! Take care of Fridays, for I assure you they are unlucky!</p>
			<p>“When I spoke of going away, I saw that her eyes filled with tears, but when I said I should be back very soon, she clapped her hands, and said:</p>
			<p>“ ‘I am very glad you are going, then! You must bring me back something; a mere trifle, just a souvenir, but a souvenir that you have chosen for me. You must find out what I should like best, do you hear? And then I shall see whether you have any imagination.’</p>
			<p>“She thought for a few moments, and then added:</p>
			<p>“I forbid you to spend more than twenty francs on it. I want it for the intention, and for the remembrance of your penetration, and not for its intrinsic value.”</p>
			<p>“And then, after another moment’s silence she said, in low voice, and with downcast eyes:</p>
			<p>“If it costs you nothing in money, and if it is something very ingenious and pretty, I will⁠ ⁠… I will kiss you.”</p>
			<p>“The next day, I was in Cologne. It was the case of a terrible accident, which had thrown a whole family into despair, and a difficult amputation was necessary. They put me up; I might say, they almost locked me up, and I saw nobody but people in tears, who almost deafened me with their lamentaions; I operated on a dying man who nearly died under my hands, and with whom I remained two nights, and then, when I saw that there was a chance for his recovery, I drove to the station. I had, however, made a mistake in the trains, and I had an hour to wait, and so I wandered about the streets, still thinking of my poor patient, when a man accosted me. I do not know German, and he was totally ignorant of French, but at last I made out that he was offering me some relics. I thought of Gilberte, for I knew her fanatical devotion, and here was my present ready to hand, so I followed the man into a shop where religious objects were for sale, and I bought a small piece of a bone of one of the eleven thousand virgins.</p>
			<p>“The pretended relic was enclosed in a charming, old silver box, and that determined my choice, and putting my purchase into my pocket, I went to the railway station, and so to Paris.</p>
			<p>“As soon as I got home, I wished to examine my purchase again, and on taking hold of it, I found that the box was open, and the relic lost! It was no good to hunt in my pocket, and to turn it inside out; the small bit of bone, which was no bigger than half a pin, had disappeared.</p>
			<p>“You know, my dear little Abbé, that my faith is not very great, but, as my friend, you are magnanimous enough to put up with my indifference, and to leave me alone, and to wait for the future, so you say. But I absolutely disbelieve in the relics of secondhand dealers in piety, and you share my doubts in that respect. Therefore, the loss of that bit of sheep’s carcass did not grieve me, and I easily procured a similar fragment, which I carefully fastened inside my jewel, and then I went to see my intended.</p>
			<p>“As soon as she saw me, she ran up to me, smiling and anxious, and said to me:</p>
			<p>“ ‘What have you brought me?’</p>
			<p>“I pretended to have forgotten, but she did not believe me, and I made her beg me, and beseech me, even. But when I saw that she was devoured by curiosity, I gave her the sacred silver box. She appeared overjoyed.</p>
			<p>“ ‘A relic! Oh! A relic!’</p>
			<p>“And she kissed the box passionately, so that I was ashamed of my deception. She was not quite satisfied, however, and her uneasiness soon turned to terrible fear, and looking straight into my eyes, she said:</p>
			<p>“ ‘Are you sure that it is authentic?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘Absolutely certain.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘How can you be so certain?’</p>
			<p>“I was caught, for to say that I had bought it through a man in the streets, would be my destruction. What was I to say? A wild idea struck me, and I said, in a low, mysterious voice:</p>
			<p>“ ‘I stole it for you.’</p>
			<p>“She looked at me with astonishment and delight in her large eyes.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Oh! You stole it? Where?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘In the cathedral; in the very shrine of the Eleven Thousand Virgins.’</p>
			<p>“Her heart beat with pleasure, and she murmured:</p>
			<p>“ ‘Oh! Did you really do that⁠ ⁠… for me? Tell me⁠ ⁠… all about it!’</p>
			<p>“There was no escape, I could not go back. I made up a fanciful story, with precise details. I had given the custodian of the building a hundred francs to be allowed to go about the building by myself; the shrine was being repaired, but I happened to be there just when the workmen and clergy were at lunch; by removing a small panel, I had been enabled to seize a small piece of bone (oh! so small), among a quantity of others (I said a quantity, as I thought of the amount that the remains of the skeletons of eleven thousand virgins must produce). Then I went to a goldsmith’s and bought a casket worthy of the relic; and I was not sorry to let her know that the silver box cost me five hundred francs.</p>
			<p>“But she did not think of that; she listened to me, trembling; in an ecstasy, and whispering:</p>
			<p>“ ‘How I love you!’ she threw herself into my arms.</p>
			<p>“Just note this: I had committed sacrilege for her sake. I had committed a theft; I had violated a shrine; violated and stolen holy relics, and for that she adored me, thought me loving, tender, divine. Such is woman, my dear Abbé.</p>
			<p>“For two months I was the best of fiancés. In her room, she had made a kind of magnificent chapel in which to keep this bit of mutton chop, which, as she thought, had made me commit that love-crime, and she worked up her religious enthusiasm in front of it every morning and evening. I had asked her to keep the matter secret, for fear, as I said, that I might be arrested, condemned and given over to Germany, and she kept her promise.</p>
			<p>“Well, at the beginning of the summer, she was seized with an irresistible wish to see the scene of my exploit, and she begged her father so persistently (without telling him her secret reason), that he took her to Cologne, but without telling me of their trip, according to his daughter’s wish.</p>
			<p>“I need not tell you that I had not seen the interior of the cathedral. I do not know where the tomb (if there be a tomb) of the Eleven Thousand Virgins is, and then, it appears that it is unapproachable, alas!</p>
			<p>“A week afterwards, I received ten lines, breaking off our engagement, and then an explanatory letter from her father, whom she had, somewhat late, taken into her confidence.</p>
			<p>“At the sight of the shrine, she had suddenly seen through my trickery and my lie, and had also found out that I was innocent of any other crime. Having asked the keeper of the relics whether any robbery had been committed, the man began to laugh, and pointed out to them how impossible such a crime was, but from the moment I had not burgled a sacred edifice, and plunged my profane hand into venerable relics, I was no longer worthy of my fairhaired and delicate betrothed.</p>
			<p>“I was forbidden the house; I begged and prayed in vain, nothing could move the fair devotee, and I grew ill from grief. Well, last week, her cousin, Madame d’Arville, who is yours also, sent word to me that she should like to see me, and when I called, she told me on what conditions I might obtain my pardon, and here they are. I must bring her a relic, a real, authentic relic, certified to be such by Our Holy Father, the Pope, of some virgin and martyr, and I am going mad with worry and trouble.</p>
			<p>“I will go to Rome, if needful, but I cannot call on the Pope unexpectedly, and tell him my stupid adventure; and, besides, I doubt whether they let private individuals have relics. Could not you give me an introduction to some cardinal, or only to some French prelate, who possesses some remains of a female saint? Or perhaps you may have the precious object she wants in your collection?</p>
			<p>“Help me out of my difficulty, my dear Abbé, and I promise you that I will be converted ten years sooner than I otherwise should be!</p>
			<p>“Madame d’Arville, who takes the matter seriously, said to me the other day:</p>
			<p>“ ‘Poor Gilberte will never marry.’</p>
			<p>“My dear old schoolfellow, will you allow your cousin to die the victim of stupid deception on my part? Pray prevent her from being the eleventh thousand and one virgin.</p>
			<p>“Pardon me, I am unworthy, but I embrace you, and love you with all my heart.</p>
			<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Your old friend,</p>
			<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">“Henri Fontal.”</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
