<h2>The Closet</h2>
<p>After dinner we were talking about women, for what else is there to talk about, among men? One of us said:</p>
<p>&quot;By the way, I had a curious adventure of that kind.&quot; And this is what he told us:</p>
<p>&quot;One evening last winter, I was suddenly taken with one of those depressing, overwhelming fits of lassitude, which seize upon one, body and soul, from time to time. I was at home alone, and I knew well that if I remained there I should have a frightful attack of despondency, of the kind that leads to suicide when they return often.</p>
<p>&quot;I put on my overcoat and went out, without knowing at all what I was going to do. Having descended to the Boulevard, I began to walk along past the caf&#233;s, nearly empty, for it was raining. One of those fine rains was falling that dampen the spirits as much as the clothes; not one of those good showers, striking one in a cascade and driving pedestrians into doorways out of breath, but a rain so fine that one does not feel the drops, a humid rain that unceasingly deposits upon you imperceptible droplets and covers your clothing with a cold, penetrating moisture.</p>
<p>&quot;What should I do? I went up and down, seeking some place to spend a couple of hours, and discovering, for the first time, that there was not a place of amusement in all Paris in the evening. Finally, I decided to enter the Folies-Berg&#232;res, that amusing woman market.</p>
<p>&quot;There were very few people in the huge auditorium. In the long, semicircular promenade there were only people of no importance, whose vulgarity was apparent in their walk, their clothing, the cut of their hair and beard, their hats, and their complexion. There was hardly one man who looked clean, perfectly clean, and whose clothes were not odd. As for the girls they are always the same, as you know, plain, weary, drooping, walking with that quick step and that air of imbecile disdain which they assume, I know not why.</p>
<p>&quot;I said to myself that truly not one of these flagging creatures, greasy rather than fat, either bloated or very thin, with the paunch of a prelate and their long legs bowed, was worth the louis that they obtained with much difficulty after having demanded five.</p>
<p>&quot;But suddenly I perceived one of them, a little one that looked nice; not very young, but fresh, droll, and provoking. I stopped her and, stupidly, without thinking, set my price for the night. I did not wish to return home alone, all alone; I preferred rather the company and embraces of this creature.</p>
<p>&quot;And so I followed her. She lived in a big, big house in the Rue des Martyrs. The gas was already extinguished on the staircase. I mounted slowly, constantly lighting wax-matches, striking the steps with my feet, stumbling and ill at ease, following a petticoat, the rustle of which I heard before me.</p>
<p>&quot;She stopped at the fourth story, and having shut again the outside door, she asked:</p>
<p>&quot;And you wish to remain until to-morrow?&#39; &quot;Yes. You know that was the agreement.&quot; &quot;All right, my dear, I only wanted to know. Wait for me here a minute, I will return immediately.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;And she left me in the darkness. I heard her close two doors, then it seemed to me she was speaking with somebody. I was surprised and disturbed. The idea of blackmail occurred to me. But I have fists and solid muscles. &#39;We shall see,&#39; thought I.</p>
<p>&quot;I listened with all attention, both of ear and mind. Some one was moving, walking about, but with great precaution. Then another door was opened, and it seemed to me that I still heard talking, but in a very low voice.</p>
<p>&quot;She returned, bringing a lighted candle. &#39;You can enter now,&#39; she said.</p>
<p>&quot;She spoke familiarly, as a sign of possession. I entered, and after having crossed a dining-room, where it was evident nobody ever dined, I entered a chamber like that of all these girls, a furnished room, with rep curtains, and eider-down silk quilt with suspicious-looking spots.</p>
<p>&quot;She continued: &#39;Make yourself at home, my dear.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I inspected the apartment with an eye of suspicion. There seemed nothing disquieting, however. She undressed herself so quickly that she was in bed before I had my overcoat off. Then she began to laugh:</p>
<p>&quot;Well, what is the matter with you? Are you changed into a pillar of salt? Come! Make haste!&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I imitated her and joined her. Five minutes later I had a foolish desire to dress again and go out. But the overwhelming lassitude which had seized me at my house, returned to me, depriving me of all strength to move, and I remained, in spite of the disgust which I had for this public bed. The sensual charm which I fancied I saw down there, under the lights of the theatre, had disappeared in my arms, and I had with me, flesh to flesh, only a vulgar girl, like all the rest, whose indifferent and complaisant kiss had an after-taste of garlic.</p>
<p>&quot;I began to talk to her:</p>
<p>&quot;Have you been here long?&#39; said I.</p>
<p>&quot;Six months the fifteenth of January.&#39; &quot;Where were you before that?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I was in the Rue Clauzel. But the concierge made so much trouble that I left.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;And she began to relate an interminable story of the concierge who had made some scandal about her.</p>
<p>&quot;Suddenly I heard something moving near us. At first there was a sigh, then a slight but distinct noise, as if some one had stirred in a chair.</p>
<p>&quot;I sat up quickly in bed and asked: &#39;What was that noise?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;She answered with tranquil assurance: &#39;Don&#39;t disturb yourself, my dear, it is my neighbour. The partition is so thin that we hear everything as if they were here. What rotten holes these are. They are made of pasteboard.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;My indolence was so strong that I got down under the clothes again. We continued our talk. Incited by the curiosity which drives all men to question these creatures upon their first adventure, to wish to raise the veil from their first fault in order to find in them some far-off trace of innocence, that we may find something to love, perhaps, in the rapid recital evoked by their candour and the shame of long ago, I asked her about her first lover.</p>
<p>&quot;I knew that she would lie. What did it matter? Among all the lies I might discover, perhaps, some sincere or touching incident.</p>
<p>Come,&#39; said I, &#39;tell me who he was.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;He was an oarsman.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Ah! Tell me about it. Where were you?&#39; &quot;I was at Argenteuil.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;What were you doing there?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I was maid in a restaurant.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;What restaurant?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;At the Marin d&#39;Eau Douce. Do you know it?&#39; &quot;Well, yes; Bonanfan&#39;s.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Yes, that&#39;s the one.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;And how did he pay his court, this oarsman?&quot; &quot;While I was making his bed. He forced me.&#39; &#8220;But suddenly I recalled the theory of a doctor of my acquaintance, an observing, philosophic doctor who, in his practice in a great hospital, had daily examples of these girl-mothers and prostitutes, and knew all the shame and misery of women, the poor women who become the hideous prey of the wandering male with money in his pocket.</p>
<p>&#39;Invariably,&#39; he told me, &#8216;a girl is debauched by a man of her own class and station in life. I have made volumes of observations upon it. It is cus tomary to accuse the rich of culling the flower of innocence from the children of the people. That is not true. The rich pay for the culled bouquet. They cull also, but at the second flowering; they never cut the first.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Then turning toward my companion, I began to laugh:</p>
<p>&quot;Come now, I know all your story by heart. The oarsman was not the first, as you well know.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Oh! yes, my dear, I swear it!&#39; &quot;You are lying.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Oh! no, I promise you I am not.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;You lie. Come, tell me the truth.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;She seemed to hesitate, astonished. I continued:</p>
<p>&quot;I am a sorcerer, my good child, a hypnotist. If you do not tell me the truth, I shall put you to sleep, and then I can find it out.</p>
<p>&quot;She was afraid, being stupid like her kind. She murmured:</p>
<p>&quot;How did you ever guess it?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I replied: &quot;Come, speak.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Oh! the first time, it was almost nothing. There was a country holiday and a chef was called in for the occasion, M. Alexander. As soon as he came he had it all his own way in the house. He ordered everybody, even the master and mistress, as if he had been a king. He was a tall, handsome man who had hardly enough room to stand in front of the stove. He was always shouting: &quot;Here, some butter some eggs- some Madeira!&quot; And you had to run to him with everything at once, or he would get angry and say things to you that would make you blush all over your body.</p>
<p>&quot;When the day&#39;s work was done he installed himself in front of the door and began to smoke. And, as I passed in front of him with a pile of plates, he said to me: &quot;Hello, kid, won&#39;t you come down to the edge of the river and show me the country?&quot; I went, like a fool; and scarcely had we arrived at the bank when he forced me so quickly that I did not even know that it was done. And then he went away by the nine o&#39;clock train, and I never saw him again after that.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I asked: &quot;Is that all?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;She stammered: &#39;Oh! I believe Florentin belongs to him.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Who is Florentin?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;He is my little boy.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Ah! very well. And you made the oarsman believe that he was the father, did you not?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;&#39;Yes.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Had this oarsman money?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Yes, he left me an income of three hundred francs for Florentin&#39;s support.</p>
<p>&quot;I began to be amused, and continued:</p>
<p>&quot;Very well, my girl, very well. stupid than one would believe. Florentin now?&#39;</p>
<p>You are all less And how old is</p>
<p>&quot;She answered: &#39;Twelve years old. He will take his first communion in the spring.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;That is good; and since that you have conscientiously followed your profession?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;She sighed resignedly: &#39;One does what one can.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;A loud noise in another part of the room made me leap out of bed with a bound; it was the noise of some one falling, then rising and groping with his hands upon the wall. I had seized the candle and was looking about, frightened and furious. She got up also and tried to hold me back, saying:</p>
<p>&quot;It is nothing, my dear, I assure you it is nothing.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;But I had discovered on which side of the wall this strange noise was. I went straight toward a concealed door at the head of the bed and opened it suddenly—and perceived there a poor little boy, trembling and staring at me with frightened eyes, a pale, thin little boy beside a large chair filled with straw, from which he had fallen.</p>

<p>&quot;When he saw me, he began to cry and, opening his arms to his mother:</p>
<p>&quot;It was not my fault, mamma, it was not my fault. I was asleep and I fell. You mustn&#39;t scold me, for it was not my fault.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I turned toward the woman and said:</p>
<p>&quot;What does he mean?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;She seemed sad and embarrassed. But finally she said in a broken voice:</p>
<p>&quot;What can you expect? I do not earn enough to put the child to school! I must take care of him somehow, and I cannot afford to hire another room. He sleeps with me when I have no one. When some one comes for an hour or two, he can stay in the closet very well and keep quiet; he knows how. But when one remains all night, as you have, his muscles are fatigued from sleeping on the chair- and it is not the child&#39;s fault. I would like to see you you sleep all night on a chair another song</p>
<p>—you would sing</p>
<p>&quot;She was angry, wrought up, and was shouting. &quot;The child was still crying. A poor child, delicate and timid, the child of the closet, of the cold, dark closet, a child who came from time to time to get a little warmth in the bed when, for a moment, it was empty.</p>
<p>&quot;I, too, had an inclination to weep. &quot;I returned home to my own bed.&#39;</p>
<p>BOMBARD</p>
<p>L</p>
<p>IFE often seemed very hard to Simon Bombard! He was born with an incredible capacity for doing nothing and with an immoderate desire to follow this vocation. All effort, whether moral or physical, every movement accomplished for a purpose, appeared to him beyond his strength. As soon as he heard anyone speak of anything serious he became confused, his mind being incapable of tension or even attention.</p>
<p>The son of a linen-draper in Caen, he took things easily, as they said in the family, until he was twenty-five years of age. But as his parents were always nearer bankruptcy than fortune, he suffered greatly for want of money.</p>
<p>He was a big, tall fine-looking fellow, with red whiskers, cut Norman fashion, of florid complexion, blue eyes, with the first signs of a paunch, and dressed with the swagger elegance of a provincial on a holiday. He laughed and gesticulated on every occasion, displaying a noisy good nature with all the assurance of the commercial traveler. He considered that life was made principally for love and laughter, and as soon as it became necessary to curb his noisy enjoyment, he fell into a kind of chronic somnolence, being incapable of sadness.</p>
<p>His need of money harassed him until he formed the habit of repeating a phrase now celebrated in his circle of acquaintance: &quot;For ten thousand francs a year, I would become an executioner.&quot;</p>
<p>Now, he went each year to Trouville for a fortnight. He called this &quot;spending the season.&#39; He would install himself at the house of his cousins, who gave him the use of a room, and from the day of his arrival to that of his departure he would promenade along the board walk which extends along the great stretch of seashore.</p>
<p>He walked with an air of confidence, his hands in his pockets or crossed behind his back, always clothed in ample garments, with light waistcoats and showy cravats, his hat somewhat over his ear and a cheap cigar in one corner of his mouth.</p>
<p>He went along, brushing up against the elegantly dressed women and staring contemptuously at the men like a fellow ready for a fight, and seeking seeking seeking.</p>
<p>He was after a wife, counting entirely upon his face and his physique. He said to himself: &quot;Why the devil, in all the crowd that comes here, should I not be able to find what I want?&quot; And he hunted with the scent of a foxhound, with the keen instinct of a Norman, sure that he would recognize her, the woman who would make him rich, the moment he perceived her.</p>
<p>One Monday morning he murmured: &quot;Hello! hello! hello!&quot; The weather was superb, one of those yellow and blue days of the month of July, when one might say that there was a deluge of heat. The vast shore covered with people, costumes, colours, had the air of a garden of women; and the fishing boats with their brown sails, almost immovable upon the blue water which reflected them upside down, seemed asleep under the great sun at ten o&#39;clock in the morning. There they remained, opposite the wooden pier, some near, some further off, some still further, as if overcome by a summer day idleness, too indifferent to seek the open sea, or even to return to port. And in the distance one could vaguely perceive in the mist the coast of Havre, showing two white points on its summit, the lighthouses of Sainte-Adresse.</p>
<p>He said to himself: &quot;Hello, hello, hello!&quot; For he had passed her now for the third time and perceived that she had noticed him, this mature woman, experienced and courageous, who was making a bid for his attention. He had noticed her before, because she seemed also in quest of some one. She was an Englishwoman, rather tall, a little thin, an audacious Englishwoman whom circumstances and much journeying had made a kind of man. Not bad, on the whole, walking along slowly with short steps, soberly and simply clothed, but wearing a queer sort of hat as Englishwomen always do. She had rather pretty eyes, high cheek-bones, a little red, teeth that were too long and always visible.</p>
<p>When he came to the pier, he retraced his steps to see if she would meet him again. He met her and threw her an ardent glance, a glance which seemed to say: &quot;Here I am!&quot;</p>
<p>But how should he speak to her? He returned a fifth time, and when he was again face to face with her she dropped her parasol. He rushed forward, picked it up and presented it to her, saying:</p>
<p>&quot;Permit me, Madame</p>
<p>She responded: &quot;Oh, you are very kind!&quot; And then they looked at each other. They had nothing more to say. But she blushed. Then becoming courageous, he said:</p>
<p>&quot;We are having beautiful weather here.&quot; And she answered: &quot;Oh, delicious!&quot;</p>
<p>And then they again faced each other, embarrassed, neither thinking of going away. It was she who finally had the audacity to ask: &quot;Are you going to be here long?&quot;</p>
<p>He answered, laughing: &quot;Oh! yes, about as long as I care to.&quot; Then suddenly he proposed: &quot;Would you like to go down to the pier? It is pretty there on a day like this.&quot;</p>
<p>She simply said: &quot;I should be much pleased.&quot; And they walked along side by side, she with her stiff, rigid movements, he with the rolling swagger of a gander showing off in a farmyard.</p>
<p>Three months later the leading merchants of Caen received one morning a square white card which said:</p>
<p>&quot;M. and Mme. Prosper Bombard have the honour to announce the marriage of their son, M. Simon Bombard, to Mme. Kate Robertson.&quot; and on the other side:</p>
<p>&quot;Mme. Kate Robertson has the honour of announcing her marriage to M. Simon Bombard.&quot;</p>
<p>They settled in Paris. The fortune of the wife amounted to fifteen thousand francs a year free of incumbrances. Simon wished to have four hundred francs a month for his personal expenses. He had to prove that his tenderness merited this amount; he did prove it easily and obtained what he asked for.</p>
<p>At first everything went well. Young Mme. Bombard was no longer young, assuredly, and her freshness had undergone some wear; but she had a way of exacting things which made it impossible for anyone to refuse her. She would say, with her grave, wilful, English accent: &quot;Oh! Simon, now we must go to bed,&quot; which made Simon start toward the bed like a dog that had been ordered, &quot;To your kennel.&quot; And she knew how to have her way by day and night, in a manner there was no resisting.</p>
<p>She did not get angry; she made no scenes; she never raised her voice; she never had the appearance of being irritated or hurt, or even disturbed. She knew how to talk, that was all; and she spoke to the point, and in a tone that admitted no contradiction.</p>
<p>More than once Simon was on the point of rebelling; but against the brief and imperious desires of this singular woman he found himself unable to stand out. Nevertheless, when the conjugal kisses began to be meagre and monotonous, and he had in his pocket what would bring to him something greater, he paid for satiety, but with a thousand precautions.</p>
<p>Mme. Bombard perceived all this, without his knowing how; and one evening she announced to him that she had rented a house at Mantes where they would live in the future.</p>
<p>Then existence became harder. He tried various kinds of pastimes which did not at all compensate for the feminine conquests for which he longed.</p>
<p>He fished, learned how to tell the places which the gudgeon liked, which the roach and carp preferred, the favourite spots of the bream and the kinds of bait that the different fish will take.</p>
<p>But in watching his floater as it trembled on the surface of the water, other visions haunted his mind. Then he became the friend of the chief of the office of the Subprefect and the captain of the police; and they played whist in the evening at the Caf&#233; du Commerce, but his sorrowful eye would disrobe the queen of clubs or of diamonds, while the problem of the absent legs on these two-headed figures would confuse the images awakened awakened in his mind.</p>
<p>Then he conceived a plan, a typical specimen of Norman cunning. He would have his wife take a maid who suited him; not a beautiful girl, a coquette, fond of clothes, but a gawky woman, rough and strong-backed, who would not arouse suspicions and whom he had carefully coached in his plans.</p>
<p>She was recommended to them by the collector of tolls, his accomplice and obliging friend, who guaranteed her in every way. And Madame Bombard accepted with confidence the treasure they brought to her.</p>
<p>Simon was happy, happy with precaution, with fear, and with unbelievable difficulties. He could never escape the watchful eye of his wife, except for a few short moments from time to time, and then without security. He sought some plan, some stratagem, and he ended by finding one that succeeded perfectly.</p>
<p>Madame Bombard, who had nothing to do, retired early, while Bombard, who played whist at the Caf&#233; du Commerce, returned each evening at half past nine, exactly. He got Victorine to wait for him in the passageway of his house, under the vestibule steps, in the darkness.</p>
<p>He only had five minutes or more for he was always in fear of a surprise; but five minutes from time to time sufficed for his ardour, and he slipped a louis into the servant&#39;s hand, for he was generous in his pleasures, and she would quickly remount to her garret.</p>
<p>And he laughed, he triumphed all alone, and repeated aloud, like King Midas&#39;s barber fishing for whitebait from the reeds on the river bank: &quot;Fooled, old girl!&quot;</p>
<p>And the happiness of having fooled Madame Bombard made up to him in great part for the imperfection and incompleteness of his salaried conquest.</p>
<p>One evening he found Victorine waiting for him as was her custom, but she appeared to him more lively, more animated than usual, and he remained perhaps ten minutes at the rendezvous in the corridor.</p>
<p>When he entered the conjugal chamber, Madame Bombard was not there. He felt a cold chill run down his back and sank into a chair, tortured with fear.</p>
<p>She appeared with a candlestick in her hand. He asked trembling:</p>
<p>&quot;You have been out?&quot;</p>
<p>She answered quietly: &quot;I went to the kitchen for a glass of water.</p>
<p>He forced himself to calm his suspicions of what she might have heard; but she seemed tranquil, happy, confident, and he was reassured.</p>
<p>. When they entered the dining-room for breakfast the next morning, Victorine put the cutlets on the table. As she turned to go out, Madame Bombard handed her a louis which she held up delicately between her two fingers, and said to her, with her calm, serious accent:</p>
<p>&quot;Here, my girl, here are twenty francs which I deprived you of last night. I return them to you.&quot;</p>
<p>And the flabbergasted girl took the gold piece, gazing at it stupidly, while the terrorized Bombard looked at his wife with wide-open eyes.</p>
