<h2>The Patron</h2>
<p>He would never have dared to hope that such good fortune would be his! The son of a provincial Sheriff, Jean Marin had come to Paris, like so many others, to study law in the Latin Quarter. In the various caf&#233;s which he had successively patronized, he had made friends with a number of talkative students, who chattered about politics as they drank their beer. He developed great admiration for them and became their follower, even paying for their drinks when he happened to have any money.</p>
<p>Afterwards, he practised law and handled some suits, which he lost, when, one morning, he read in the papers that a friend of his student days had become a deputy. Again he became his faithful servant, the friend who discharges all the troublesome errands, whom one sends for when he is wanted, and with whom one stands on no ceremony.</p>
<p>But it so happened, by the chance of politics, that the deputy became a minister, and six months afterwards, Jean Marin was appointed State Councillor.</p>
<p>At first, he was so puffed up with pride that he almost lost his head. He would take walks just to show himself off, as if the people he met in the street could guess his position just by looking at him. He always managed to say to the various tradespeople he dealt with, as well as to the newsdealers and even the cabmen:</p>
<p>&quot;I, who am a State Councillor . . .&quot;</p>
<p>He naturally experienced, as the direct result of his profession and his newly acquired dignity, an imperative desire to patronize. He would offer his influence to everyone he met, at all times, and with inexhaustible generosity.</p>
<p>When he ran up against a man he knew on the boulevard, he would rush up to him in a delighted manner, shake hands, inquire after his health and then, without waiting for any inquiry, would blurt out:</p>
<p>&quot;You know I am State Councillor, and I am absolutely at your service. If there is anything I can do for you, I hope you will call on me unhesitatingly. In my position, a man can do a lot for his friends.</p>
<p>Then he would go into some caf&#233; with this friend and ask for some writing-paper and a pen and ink &quot;just one sheet, waiter, I want to write a letter of introduction.&quot;</p>
<p>He wrote quantities of these letters, sometimes twenty, thirty, and fifty a day. He wrote them at the Caf&#233; Am&#233;ricain, at Bignon&#39;s, at Tortoni&#39;s, at the Maison-Dor&#233;e, at the Caf&#233; Riche, at the Helder, at the Caf&#233; Anglais, at the Napolitain, everywhere. He addressed them to every official in the Republic, from magistrates to ministers. And he was happy, thoroughly happy.</p>
<p>One morning, as he was leaving his rooms to go to the State Council it began to rain. He was inclined to take a cab, but did not, finally deciding that he would walk.</p>
<p>The shower became very heavy, soaking the pavements, and inundating the streets. M. Marin was compelled to seek shelter in a doorway. An old priest had already taken refuge there, an old, whitehaired priest. Before he had been appointed State Councillor, M. Marin did not care much for the clergy. But now, ever since a Cardinal had consulted him regarding some delicate matter, he treated the clergy with consideration. The downpour was so heavy that the two men were forced to take refuge in the concierge&#39;s box, to avoid getting splashed. M. Marin, who was constantly impelled to brag about himself, declared:</p>
<p>&quot;A very bad day, monsieur l&#39;abb&#233;.&quot; The old priest bowed:</p>
<p>&quot;Ah! yes, monsieur, and it is all the more disagreeable when one is in Paris for a few days only.&quot; &quot;Ah! so you live in the provinces?&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;Yes, monsieur, I am only passing through Paris.&quot; &#39;Indeed, it is most annoying to have rain when one is spending a day or so in the capital. We officials, who live here all the year round, do not mind it.&quot;</p>
<p>The abb&#233; made no reply and looked into the street, where the rain was beginning to stop a little. And suddenly clutching his gown in both hands, he resolved to brave the elements.</p>
<p>M. Marin, seeing him depart, shouted:</p>
<p>&quot;You will get drenched, monsieur l&#39;abb&#233;. Wait a few minutes more, the rain will stop.&#39;</p>
<p>The old man wavered and then said:</p>
<p>&quot;Well, I&#39;m in a great hurry. I have a very urgent engagement.&#39;</p>
<p>M. Marin appeared very much concerned. &quot;But you will certainly be wet through. May I ask where you are going?&quot;</p>
<p>The priest seemed to hesitate a moment, but then he said:</p>
<p>&quot;I am going in the direction of the Palais-Royal.&quot; &quot;Well then, if you will allow me, monsieur l&#39;abb&#233;, I will offer you the shelter of my umbrella. I am going to the State Council. I am a State Coun cillor.&quot;</p>
<p>The old priest raised his eyes, looked at the speaker and exclaimed:</p>
<p>&quot;I am greatly obliged to you, monsieur, and accept your offer with pleasure.&quot;</p>
<p>Then M. Marin took him by the arm, and they set out. He led him along, watching over him and giving advice:</p>
<p>&quot;Be careful of this gutter, monsieur l&#39;abb&#233;. Look out for the carriage wheels, they throw mud all over one. Mind the umbrellas! Nothing is more of a danger to the eyes than the sharp ends of an umbrella! The women, especially, are so careless; they never mind anything and thrust their sunshades and their umbrellas right under people&#39;s noses. And they never go out of anyone&#39;s way, either. They seem to think that they own the whole city. I think myself that their education has been sadly neglected.&#39;</p>
<p>And M. Marin chuckled gleefully.</p>
<p>The priest made no reply. He picked his way carefully along the streets, slightly bent, choosing with discrimination the dry spots on the pavement so as not to bespatter his shoes and gown.</p>
<p>M. Marin went on:</p>
<p>&quot;I suppose you are in Paris for a little rest?&quot;</p>
<p>The old man retorted:</p>
<p>&quot;No, I have come on business.&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;Oh! anything important? Might I inquire what it is? If I can be of service to you, I would only be too glad.&quot;</p>
<p>The abb&#233; looked embarrassed. He mumbled: &quot;Oh! it&#39;s a little personal matter. A little difficulty with with my bishop. It could hardly interest you. It is something about the adjustthe adjustment of some ecclesiastical mat ment ter.&quot;</p>
<p>M. Marin became eager.</p>
<p>&quot;Why, these matters are always referred to the State Council. In this case I wish you would make use of me.&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;Yes, it is to the State Council I am going. You are most kind. I have an appointment with M. Lerep&#232;re and M. Savon, and maybe I will interview M. Petitpas also.&quot;</p>
<p>M. Marin came to a stop.</p>
<p>&#39;Why, they are my friends, monsieur l&#39;abb&#233;, my dearest friends, fine fellows, all of them. I shall warmly recommend you to them. Rely on me.&#8221; The priest thanked him and protested his undying gratitude.</p>
<p>M. Marin was delighted.</p>
<p>&quot;Oh! you can thank your stars, monsieur l&#39;abb&#233;, that you met me. You will see how smoothly everything will go now.&quot;</p>
<p>They finally reached the State Council. M. Marin conducted the priest to his office, installed him be fore the open fire and then sat down at his desk and wrote:</p>
<p>&quot;My dear colleague, allow me to recommend most heartily to you a very worthy priest, M. l&#39;abb&#233;... He paused and inquired: &quot;Your name, please?&quot; &quot;Abb&#233; Ceinture.&quot;</p>
<p>M. Marin wrote:</p>
<p>&quot;M. l&#39;abb&#233; Ceinture, who needs your intercession in a little matter which he will lay before you.</p>
<p>&quot;I am glad of this opportunity which allows me, my dear colleague, .</p>

<p>And he concluded with the customary compli ments.</p>
<p>After he had written the three letters, he handed them to his prot&#233;g&#233; who departed amid renewed protestations of gratitude.</p>
<p>M. Marin attended to his official duties, went home, spent a quiet day and slept peacefully that night. The next morning he woke up happy, dressed and sat down to read the papers.</p>
<p>The first one he opened was a radical organ. He read:</p>
<p>&quot;Our Clergy and our Officials.</p>
<p>&quot;There seems to be no end to the misdeeds of the clergy. A certain priest named Ceinture, convicted of having conspired against the existing government, accused of infamous acts, that we will not even mention, suspected besides of being a former Jesuit transformed into an ordinary priest, revoked by his bishop for reasons which are said to be unprintable, and summoned to Paris to ex plain his conduct, has found a warm partisan in the State Councillor, Marin, who did not hesitate to give this cassocked rascal the most enthusiastic letters of recommendation to all his Republican colleagues.</p>
<p>&quot;We wish to call the minister&#39;s attention to the unqualifiable attitude of this State Councillor . . .&quot;</p>
<p>M. Marin sprang to his feet, slammed down the paper and rushed off to see his colleague Petitpas, who exclaimed:</p>
<p>&quot;Well you must have gone crazy to recommend that old conspirator to me.&quot;</p>
<p>Thoroughly bewildered, M. Marin retorted: &quot;No . . . no you see, I was deceived myself. He looked like such a good man . . . he tricked me... he tricked me most shamefully. I beg of you to condemn him severely, most severely. I shall go myself to the Attorney General and the Archbishop of Paris, yes, to the Archbishop.</p>
<p>And he sat down abruptly at M. Petitpas&#39; desk and wrote:</p>
<p>&quot;My Lord: I have the honour to inform Your Grace that I have been made a victim of the intrigues and lies of a certain abb&#233; Ceinture, who shamefully took advantage of my good faith. &quot;Misled by the protestations of this priest, I was induced.</p>
<p>Then, after he had signed his name to the letter and sealed it, he turned to his colleague and remarked:</p>
<p>&quot;Look here, my dear friend, I hope this will be a lesson to you never to recommend anyone.&#39;</p>
<p>OLD MONGILET</p>
<p>IN</p>
<p>N the office old Mongilet was looked upon as an eccentric. He was an old employ&#233;, a goodnatured creature, who had never been outside Paris but once in his life.</p>
<p>It was the end of July, and each of us, every Sunday, went to roll in the grass, or bathe in the river in the country near by. Asni&#232;res, Argenteuil, Chatou, Bougival, Maisons, Poissy, had their habitu&#233;s and their ardent admirers. We argued about the merits and advantages of all these places, celebrated and delightful to all employ&#233;s in Paris. Old Mongilet would say:</p>
<p>&quot;You are like a lot of sheep! A nice place, this country you talk of!&quot;</p>
<p>And we would ask:</p>
<p>&quot;Well, how about you, Mongilet? Don&#39;t you ever go on an excursion?&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;Yes, indeed. I go in an omnibus. When I have had a good luncheon, without any hurry, at the wine shop below, I look up my route with a plan of Paris, and the time-table of the lines and connections. And then I climb up on top of the bus, open my umbrella and off we go. Oh, I see lots of things, more than you, I bet! I change my surroundings. It is as though I were taking a journey across the world, the people are so different in one street and another. I know my Paris better than anyone. And then, there is nothing more amusing than the entresols. You would not believe what one sees in there at a glance. One can guess a domestic scene simply at the sight of the face of a man who is roaring; one is amused on passing by a barber&#39;s shop, to see the barber leave his customer whose face is covered with lather to look out in the street. One exchanges heartfelt glances with the milliners just for fun, as one has no time to alight. Ah, how many things one sees!</p>
<p>&quot;It is the drama, the real, the true, the drama of nature, seen as the horses trot by. Heavens! I would not give my excursions in the omnibus for all your stupid excursions in the woods.&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;Come and try it, Mongilet, come to the country once just to see.&#8221;</p>
<p>&quot;I was there once,&quot; he replied, &quot;twenty years ago, and you will never catch me there again.&quot; &quot;Tell us about it, Mongilet.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;If you wish to hear it. This is how it was: You knew Boivin, the old clerk, whom we called Boileau?&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;Yes, perfectly.&quot;</p>
<p>&quot;He was my office chum. The rascal had a house at Colombes and always invited me to spend Sunday with him. He would say:</p>
<p>&#39;Come along, Maculotte (he called me Maculotte for fun). You will see what a nice walk we shall take.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I let myself be entrapped like an animal, and set out, one morning by the 8 o&#39;clock train. I arrived at a kind of town, a country town where there is nothing to see, and I at length found my way to an old wooden door with an iron bell, at the end of an alley between two walls.</p>
<p>&quot;I rang, and waited a long time, and at last the door was opened. What was it that opened it? I could not tell at the first glance. A woman or an ape? The creature was old, ugly, covered with old clothes that looked dirty and wicked. It had chickens&#39; feathers in its hair and looked as though it would devour me.</p>
<p>&quot;What do you want?&#39; she said.</p>
<p>&quot;M. Boivin.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;What do you want of him, of M. Boivin?&#39; &quot;I felt ill at ease on being questioned by this fury. I stammered: &#39;Why he expects me.&#39; &#39;Ah, it is you who are coming to lunch?&#39; &quot;Yes,&#39; I stammered, trembling.</p>
<p>&quot;Then, turning toward the house, she cried in an angry tone:</p>
<p>&quot;Bovin, here is your man!&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;It was my friend&#39;s wife. Little Boivin appeared immediately on the threshold of a sort of barrack of plaster covered with zinc, that looked like a footwarmer. He wore white duck trousers covered with stains and a dirty Panama hat.</p>
<p>&quot;After shaking my hands warmly, he took me into what he called his garden. It was at the end of another alleyway enclosed by high walls and was a little square the size of a pocket-handkerchief, surrounded by houses that were so high that the sun could reach it only two or three hours in the day. Pansies, pinks, wallflowers and a few rose bushes were languishing in this well without air, and hot as an oven from the refraction of heat from the roofs.</p>
<p>&quot;I have no trees,&#39; said Boivin, &#39;but the neighbours&#39; walls take their place. I have as much shade as in a wood.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Then he took hold of a button of my coat and Isaid in a low tone:</p>
<p>&quot;You can do me a service. You saw the wife. She is not agreeable, eh? To-day, as I had invited you, she gave me clean clothes; but if I spot them all is lost. I counted on you to water my plants.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I agreed. I took off my coat, rolled up my sleeves, and began to work the handle of a kind of pump that wheezed, puffed and rattled like a consumptive as it emitted a thread of water like a Wallace drinking fountain. It took me ten minutes to fill the watering-pot, and I was in a bath of perspiration. Boivin directed me:</p>
<p>66 6 Here this plant—a little more; enough now this one.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;The watering-pot leaked and my feet got more water than the flowers. The bottoms of my trousers were soaking and covered with mud. And twenty times running I kept it up, soaking my feet afresh each time, and perspiring anew as I worked the handle of the pump. And when I was tired out and wanted to stop, Boivin, in a tone of entreaty, said as he put his hand on my arm:</p>
<p>&quot;Just one more watering-pot full-just one, and that will be all.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;To thank me he gave me a rose, a big rose, but hardly had it touched my button-hole than it fell to pieces, leaving only a hard little green knot as a decoration. I was surprised, but said nothing.</p>
<p>&quot;Mme. Boivin&#39;s voice was heard in the distance: &#39;Are you ever coming? When I tell you lunch is ready!&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;We went towards the foot-warmer. If the garden was in the shade, the house, on the other hand, was in the blazing sun, and the sweating room in the Turkish bath is not so hot as was my friend&#39;s dining-room.</p>
<p>&quot;Three plates at the side of which were some half-washed forks, were placed on a table of yellow wood in the middle of which stood an earthenware dish containing warmed-up boiled beef and potatoes. We began to eat.</p>
<p>&quot;A large water bottle full of water lightly colored with wine attracted my attention. Boivin, embarrassed, said to his wife:</p>
<p>&quot;See here, my dear, just on a special occasion, are you not going to give us some plain wine?&#39; &quot;She looked at him furiously.</p>
<p>&quot;So that you may both get tipsy, is that it, and stay here gabbing all day? Thanks for the special occasion!&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;He said no more. After the stew she brought in another dish of potatoes cooked with bacon. When this dish was finished, still in silence, she announced:</p>
<p>&quot;That is all! Now get out!&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;Boivin looked at her in astonishment.</p>
<p>&quot;But the pigeon -the pigeon you plucked this morning?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;She put her hands on her hips:</p>
<p>&#39;Perhaps you have not had enough? Because you bring people here is no reason why we should devour all that there is in the house. What is there for me to eat this evening?&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;We rose. Boivin whispered:</p>
<p>&quot;Wait for me a second, and we will skip.&#39; &quot;He went into the kitchen where his wife had gone, and I overheard him say:</p>
<p>&quot;Give me twenty sous, my dear.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;What do you want with twenty sous?&#39; &quot;Why, one does not know what may happen. It is always better to have some money.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;She yelled so that I should hear:</p>
<p>&quot;No, I will not give it to you! As the man has had luncheon here, the least he can do is to pay your expenses for the day.&#39;</p>
<p>&#39;Boivin came back to fetch me. As I wished to be polite I bowed to the mistress of the house, stammering:</p>
<p>&quot;Madame—many thanks-kind welcome.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;That&#39;s all right,&#39; she replied. &#39;But do not bring him back drunk, for you will have to answer to me, you know!&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;We set out. We had to cross a perfectly bare plain under the burning sun. I attempted to gather a flower along the road and gave a cry of pain. It had hurt my hand frightfully. They call these plants nettles. And, everywhere, there was a smell of manure, enough to turn your stomach.</p>
<p>&#8220;Boivin said, &#8220;Have a little patience and we will reach the river bank.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;We reached the river. Here there was an odour of mud and dirty water, and the sun blazed down on the water so that it burned my eyes. I begged Boivin to go under cover somewhere. He took me into a kind of shanty filled with men, a river boatmen&#39;s tavern.</p>
<p>&quot;He said:</p>
<p>&quot;This does not look very grand, but it is very comfortable.&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;I was hungry. I ordered an omelet. But lo and behold, at the second glass of wine, that beggar, Boivin, lost his head, and I understand why his wife gave him water diluted.</p>
<p>&quot;He got up, declaimed, wanted to show his strength, interfered in a quarrel between two drunken men who were fighting, and, but for the landlord, who came to the rescue, we should both have been killed.</p>
<p>&quot;I dragged him away, holding him up until we reached the first bush, where I deposited him. I lay down beside him and, it seems, I fell asleep. We must certainly have slept a long time, for it was dark when I awoke. Boivin was snoring at my side. I shook him; he rose but he was still drunk, though a little less so.</p>
<p>&quot;We set out through the darkness across the plain. Boivin said he knew the way. He made me turn to the left, then to the right, then to the left. We could see neither sky nor earth, and found ourselves lost in the midst of a kind of forest of wooden stakes, that came as high as our noses. It was a vineyard and these were the supports. There was not a single light on the horizon. We wandered about in this vineyard for about an hour or two, hesitating, reaching out our arms without coming to the end, for we kept retracing our steps.</p>
<p>&quot;At length Boivin fell against a stake that tore his cheek and he remained in a sitting posture on the ground, uttering with all his might long and resounding hallos, while I screamed &#39;Help! Help!&#39; as loud as I could, lighting wax-matches to show the way to our rescuers, and also to keep up my courage.</p>
<p>&quot;At last a belated peasant heard us and put us on our right road. I took Boivin to his home, but as I was leaving him on the threshold of his garden, the door opened suddenly and his wife appeared, a candle in her hand. She frightened me horribly.</p>
<p>&quot;As soon as she saw her husband, whom she must have been waiting for since dark, she screamed, as she darted toward me:</p>
<p>&quot;Ah, scoundrel, I knew you would bring him back drunk!&#39;</p>
<p>&quot;My, how I made my escape, running all the way to the station, and as I thought the fury was pursuing me I shut myself in an inner room as the train was not due for half an hour.</p>
<p>&quot;That is why I never married, and why I never go out of Paris.&quot;</p>
