<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Log Book</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-logbook" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Log Book</h2>
			<p>Stretched at full-length on one of the divans that served also as berths on my friend Berneret’s little yacht, I was perusing a logbook while my host was sound asleep on the opposite side of the cabin.</p>
			<p>He was a peculiar chap, was Berneret, who had scarcely been off his boat these last ten years. It was a twenty-ton cutter called the Mandarin.</p>
			<p>Every Summer he cruised around the northern coast of France, England, Belgium or Holland, and in the Winter he would go to the Mediterranean, to Spain, Algeria, Italy and Greece. When on land, he could not endure its immovability and the meaningless twaddle of foolish people drove him to desperation.</p>
			<p>There are a number of men such as he, who spend their lives in those long, narrow boxes called yachts. One can see them sailing into the ports at sunset. On the deck stands a man in a blue yachting cap who, for some minutes, surveys the restless activity of the harbor, then he turns on his heel and paces the deck with long, rapid strides until night.</p>
			<p>The next day at dawn, when one looks for him, he has vanished; he has gone off again to float, to dream or to sleep⁠—and to be alone.</p>
			<p>Six months later, one meets him again, in a different port, under other skies, wandering, always wandering.</p>
			<p>Although an old friend of mine, Berneret was a puzzle to me, so that I felt vividly curious about his logbook. I copied three pages of it while he slept.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:diary">
				<p epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">Saint-Tropez, <span epub:type="se:diary.dateline">May 20th</span>: Nothing. I spent one of those delightful days when the soul seems dead in the living body. A slight easterly breeze carried us from Salin-I’Yères to Saint-Tropez; we sailed slowly and regularly over a flat, blue sea. I wanted to bathe in it and feel the cool caress of the water on my skin.</p>
				<p>At five, the Mandarin sailing before the wind to reach the bay of Grimaud, tacked about and entered the harbor. The wind had fallen, but the cutter was making good headway. We passed two tartans and one schooner going the same way.</p>
				<p>The bay of Grimaud looks like a beautiful lake surrounded by mountains covered with pine forests.</p>
				<p>Saint-Tropez lies to the left and Saint-Maxime to the right. In the back is Grimaud, an old city partly built by the Moors around a pointed mountain that is topped by the ancient castle of the Grimaldis. Spent an excellent night at Saint-Tropez.</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:diary-entry"><span epub:type="se:diary.dateline">May 21</span>: Weighed anchor at three in the morning, to take advantage of the breeze; but it was hardly more than a breath which only carried us to sea and then quickly subsided. At eight, we had hardly made two knots and I saw that I would have to spend the night at sea unless I had the Mandarin towed.</p>
				<p>So I ordered two men into the boat and at a distance of about thirty yards they began towing us. A scorching sun fell on the water and on the deck; the heat was so intense that we could not lift an arm without considerable exertion.</p>
				<p>The two men in the boat rowed a slow, regular stroke, like two worn-out machines, which still continue without stopping, although very slowly, their mechanical evolutions.</p>
				<p>Wrapped in an Algerian garment of soft white silk that enveloped my body almost without touching it, I lay on the cushions in the tent at the foot of the mast, and dreamed without interruption for five or six hours.</p>
				<p>The older I grow, the more futile human agitations appear to me. When I think that a whole country can be upset, I mean the more intelligent classes, but really the most foolish ones, because, one night, a popular singer was suspected of drinking too much champagne before she appeared on the stage!</p>
				<p>About three o’clock in the afternoon, we had doubled the point of Drammond and were heading toward the harbor of Agay.</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:diary-entry"><span epub:type="se:diary.dateline">July 22nd</span>: Left Havre at six in the morning with a stiff <abbr epub:type="se:compass">N.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="se:compass">N.</abbr> by <abbr epub:type="se:compass">E.</abbr> wind. At eight o’clock it blew harder, so I ordered the mainsail furled, keeping only the foresail and jib-sail, and plied to windward, keeping the while about five miles from the coast.</p>
				<p>At ten the wind fell; I was near Saint-Jouin, not far from Cape Antifer, so we anchored and I went ashore to climb la Valeuse and to lunch at the well-known inn kept by Ernestine.</p>
				<p>The rocks of Saint-Jouin are the most beautiful of all the northern coast of France. They look like the ruins of some old bastions. Pretty springs bubble here and there among them.</p>
				<p>A narrow path climbs up the side of the straight, white cliff, and a brook of clear, cool water splashes over pebbles and watercresses to the foot of the rock.</p>
				<p>Near this charming fountain is a wooden bench where one can sit and rest and drink the sparkling water while looking over the sea, the unbroken line of the coast and the chaos of rocks at one’s feet.</p>
				<p>Arrived within a short distance of the bench I noticed that two people were occupying it. They were holding hands, as I perceived by the motion they made to disengage them at my approach. When I got a little nearer, I suddenly recognized the woman.</p>
				<p>It was she! But who was he? Well, some other man.</p>
				<p>A little later, we had lunched in the same diningroom, I was talking to the hostess, a friend of mine, and asked her: “Who is that young woman over there?” “Why, don’t you know her? Where do you come from, anyway? That is little Jeanne Riga, of the Vaudeville.”</p>
				<p>“Ah! And who is the gentleman?”</p>
				<p>“Oh! I don’t know him,” she replied.</p>
				<p>And so I returned to my yacht, thinking all the while with egotistical contentment of this little actress who plays so well, so very well the comedy of love that once upon a time she made me feel quite unhappy. And I felt sorry, very sorry for the men for whom she plays it.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
