<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Accursed Bread</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-accursed-bread" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Accursed Bread</h2>
			<section id="the-accursed-bread-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<p>Old Taille had three daughters: Anna, the eldest, who was scarcely ever mentioned in the family; Rose, the second girl, who was eighteen; and Clara, the youngest, who was a girl of fifteen.</p>
				<p>Old Taille was a widower, and a foreman in M. Lebrument’s button-factory. He was a very upright man, very well thought of, abstemious; in fact a sort of model workman. He lived at Havre, in the Rue d’Angoulême.</p>
				<p>When Anna ran away the old man flew into a fearful rage. He threatened to kill the seducer, who was head of a department in a large draper’s establishment in that town. Then when he was told by various people that she was keeping very steady and investing money in government securities, that she was no gadabout, but was kept by a Monsieur Dubois, who was a judge of the Tribunal of Commerce, the father was appeased.</p>
				<p>He even showed some anxiety as to how she was faring, asked some of her old friends who had been to see her how she was getting on; and when told that she had her own furniture, and that her mantlepiece was covered with vases and the walls with pictures, that there were clocks and carpets everywhere, he gave a broad, contented smile. He had been working for thirty years to get together a wretched five or six thousand francs. His little girl was evidently no fool.</p>
				<p>One fine morning the son of Touchard, the cooper at the other end of the street, came and asked him for the hand of Rose, the second girl. The old man’s heart began to beat, for the Touchards were rich and in a good position. He was decidedly lucky with his girls.</p>
				<p>The marriage was agreed upon. It was settled that it should be a grand affair, and the wedding dinner was to be held at Sainte-Adresse, at Mother Gusa’s restaurant. It would cost a lot certainly; but never mind, it did not matter just for once in a way.</p>
				<p>But one morning, just as the old man was going home to breakfast with his two daughters, the door opened suddenly and Anna appeared. She was loudly dressed, wore rings and a very dressy hat. She looked undeniably pretty and nice. She threw her arms round her father’s neck before he could say a word, then fell into her sisters’ arms with many tears, and then asked for a plate, so that she might share the family soup. Old Taille was moved to tears in his turn and said several times:</p>
				<p>“That is right, dear; that is right.”</p>
				<p>Then she told them about herself. She did not wish Rose’s wedding to take place at Sainte-Adresse⁠—certainly not. It should take place at her house, and would cost her father nothing. She had settled everything and arranged everything, so it was “no good to say any more about it⁠—there!”</p>
				<p>“Very well, my dear! very well!” the old man said, “we will leave it so.” But then he felt some doubt. Would the Touchards consent? But Rose, the bride-elect, was surprised, and asked, “Why should they object, I should like to know? Just leave that to me, I will talk to Philip about it.”</p>
				<p>She mentioned it to her intended the very same day, and he declared that it would suit him exactly. Father and Mother Touchard were naturally delighted at the idea of a good dinner which would cost them nothing and said:</p>
				<p>“You may be quite sure that everything will be in first-rate style, as M. Dubois is made of money.”</p>
				<p>They asked to be allowed to bring a friend, <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Florence, the cook on the first floor, and Anna agreed to everything. The wedding was fixed for the last Tuesday of the month.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-accursed-bread-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>After the civil formalities and the religious ceremony the wedding party went to Anna’s house. Among those whom the Tailles had brought was a cousin of a certain age, a M. Sauvetanin, a man given to philosophical reflections, serious, and always very self-possessed, and <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Lamondois, an old aunt.</p>
				<p>M. Sauvetanin had been told off to give Anna his arm, as they were looked upon as the two most important and most distinguished persons in the company.</p>
				<p>As soon as they had arrived at the door of Anna’s house she let go her companion’s arm, and ran on ahead, saying, “I will show you the way,” while the invited guests followed more slowly. When they got upstairs, she stood on one side to let them pass, and they rolled their eyes and turned their heads in all directions to admire this mysterious and luxurious dwelling.</p>
				<p>The table was laid in the drawing-room as the dining-room had been thought too small. Extra knives, forks, and spoons had been hired from a neighbouring restaurant, and decanters full of wine glittered under the rays of the sun, which shone in through the window.</p>
				<p>The ladies went into the bedroom to take off their shawls and bonnets, and Old Touchard, who was standing at the door, squinted at the low, wide bed, and made funny signs to the men, with many a wink and nod. Old Taille, who thought a great deal of himself, looked with fatherly pride at his child’s well-furnished rooms, and went from one to the other holding his hat in his hand, making a mental inventory of everything, and walking like a verger in a church.</p>
				<p>Anna went backward and forward, and ran about giving orders and hurrying on the wedding feast. Soon she appeared at the door of the dining-room, and cried: “Come here, all of you, for a moment,” and when the twelve guests did as they were asked they saw twelve glasses of Madeira on a small table.</p>
				<p>Rose and her husband had their arms round each other’s waists, and were kissing each other in every corner. M. Sauvetanin never took his eyes off Anna; he no doubt felt that ardour, that sort of expectation which all men, even if they are old and ugly, feel for women of easy virtue, as if their trade, their professional duty compelled them to give a little of themselves to every male.</p>
				<p>They sat down, and the wedding breakfast began; the relatives sitting at one end of the table and the young people at the other. <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Touchard, the mother, presided on the right and the bride on the left. Anna looked after everybody, saw that the glasses were kept filled and the plates well supplied. The guests evidently felt a certain respectful em、 barrassment at the sight of the sumptuousness of the rooms and at the lavish manner in which they were treated. They all ate heartily of the good things provided, but there were no jokes such as are prevalent at weddings of that sort; it was all too grand, and it made them feel uncomfortable. Old <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Touchard, who was fond of a bit of fun, tried to enliven matters a little, and at the beginning of the dessert she exclaimed: “I say, Philip, do sing us something.” The neighbours in their street considered that he had the finest voice in all Havre.</p>
				<p>The bridegroom got up, smiled, and turning to his sister-in-law, from politeness and gallantry, tried to think of something suitable for the occasion, something serious and correct, to harmonize with the seriousness of the repast.</p>
				<p>Anna had a satisfied look on her face, and leaned back in her chair to listen, and all assumed looks of attention, though prepared to smile should smiles be called for.</p>
				<p>The singer announced, “The Accursed Bread,” and extending his right arm, which made his coat ruck up into his neck, he began.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song" xml:lang="fr">
					<p>
						<span>Il est un pain béni qu’à la terre économe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Il nous faut arracher d’un bras victorieux.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>C’est le pain du travail, celui que l’honnête homme,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Le soir, à ses enfants, apporte tout joyeux.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mais il en est un autre, à mine tentatrice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pain maudit que l’enfer pour nous damner sema, (<em>bis</em>)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Enfant, n’y touchez pas car c’est le pain du vice!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chers enfants, gardez vous de toucher ce pain-là. (<em>bis</em>)</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>They all applauded frantically. Old Touchard declared the sentiments excellent. The cook, who was one of the guests, twisted in her hands a crust at which she gazed tenderly. M. Sauvetanin murmured, “Bravo!” Aunt Lamondois had already begun to wipe away her tears with her napkin.</p>
				<p>The bridegroom announced: “Second verse,’ and launched forth with renewed vigour:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song" xml:lang="fr">
					<p>
						<span>Respect au malheureux qui, tout brisé par l’âge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nous implore en passant sur le bord du chemin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mais flétrissons celui qui, désertant l’ouvrage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alerte et bien portant, ose tendre la main.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mendier sans besoin, c’est voler la vieillesse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>C’est voler l’ouvrier que le travail courba. (<em>bis</em>)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Honte à celui qui vit du pain de la paresse,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chers enfants, gardez-vous de toucher ce pain-là. (<em>bis</em>)</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>They all yelled the refrain in chorus, even the two servants who were standing against the wall. The falsetto, piercing voices of the women put the deeper voices of the men out of tune.</p>
				<p>The aunt and the bride wept outright. Old Taille blew his nose with the noise of a trombone, and old Touchard madly brandished a whole loaf over the centre of the table. The friendly cook dropped a few silent tears on the crust with which she was still fumbling.</p>
				<p>Amid the general emotion M. Sauvetanin said:</p>
				<p>“That is the right sort of song; very different from the usual smut.”</p>
				<p>Anna, who was visibly affected, kissed her hand to her sister and pointed to her husband with an affectionate nod, as if to congratulate her.</p>
				<p>Intoxicated by his success, the young man continued:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song" xml:lang="fr">
					<p>
						<span>Dans ton simple réduit, ouvrière gentille,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tu sembles écouter la voix du tentateur.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pauvre enfant, va, crois-moi, ne quitte pas l’aiguille.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tes parents n’ont que toi, toi seule es leur bonheur.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dans un luxe honteux trouveras-tu des charmes.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lorsque, te maudissant, ton père expirera. (bis)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Le pain du déshonneur se pétrit dans les larmes</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Chers enfants, gardez-vous de toucher ce pain-là. (bis)</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>No one took up the refrain about this bread, supposed to be eaten with tears, except old Touchard and the two servants. Anna had grown deadly pale and cast down her eyes, while the bridegroom looked from one to the other without understanding the reason for this sudden coldness, and the cook hastily dropped the crust as if it were poisoned.</p>
				<p>M. Sauvetanin said solemnly, in order to save the situation: “That last couplet is not at all necessary”; and Old Taille, who had got red up to his ears, looked round the table fiercely.</p>
				<p>Then Anna, with her eyes swimming in tears, told the servants, in the faltering voice of a woman trying to stifle her sobs, to bring the champagne.</p>
				<p>All the guests were suddenly seized with exuber ant joy, and their faces became radiant again. Old Touchard, who had seen, felt, and understood nothing of what was going on, was still brandishing his loaf, and singing to himself, as he showed it to the guests:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song" xml:lang="fr">
					<p>
						<span>Chers enfants, gardez-vous de toucher ce pain-là.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The whole party, electrified by the sight of the bottles with their silver foil, loudly took up the refrain:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song" xml:lang="fr">
					<p>
						<span>Chers enfants, gardez-vous de toucher ce pain-là.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
